The Second World War
RAC Parker
----

pg 60
if hitler had any settled aims, attacking russia was one of them. in 1924 in mein kampf hitler had urged territorial exp and insisted that 'when we speak of new lands to give living space to the german ppl in the struggle for existence we must first thing of russian and her border states'.

  in june 2 1940 hitler opined that the uk would soon be ready for a 'reasonable peace' and then 'at last he would have a free hand' for his 'great and true task: the conflict with bolshevism'.

  idea being that sooner they knocked out russia, being unable to overcome britain, the sooner they could sue for peace on their terms. defeating england might take up to two years, but without russia they'd be effectively isolated on the continent and more amenable.
  with attack in 1940 being impossible they settled for may 1941.

  The unexpected ability of britain to repel german attacks forced hitler to choose between sustained cooperation with the ussr, which conveniently furnished them with the minerals and food which they needed to terribly, and was obviously difficult to 'destroy'.

pg 61

they never even figured out what to do after victory with land beyond the urals. 

by 1940 tho evidence accumulated that roosevelt had decided that US resources should be used to defend british indep. In 1941 US strenght would be negligible, 1942 significant and thereafter formidabke. Without being certain of defeating Britain by 1941, this promised a bitter struggle against the anglo saxons to endure beyond 1942; in the meanwhile the ussr could only grow stronger, leaving germany to be increasingly vulnerable to russian threats.
If they could remove russia in 1941, germany would control all the resources in continental europe and be able to face the anglo americn coalition with confidence.

furthermore in 1941 the uk would be weakened by subs and surface ships while JP could act with impunity to threaten american interests. On the assumption that it could be done in a single campaign, this was a powerful argument.


===============
Colossus Reborn: The Red Army at War: 1941-1943, Glantz, David M.
University Press of Kansas, 2005

@pg 135 chapter 4
--
catastrophic combat losses the red army suffered during this period consumed a large proportion of those who were serving in june 1941

Red army numbered 5.5 million men on 22 june 1941, about 2.7 of which were serving in field forces stationed in the western military districts. at that time soviet mobil pool contained about 12 million men, which included many fuly or partially trained reservists. this mobil capability prod the forces nec to replace those soldiers lost in 41 42 amd even increased the army's overall strength

consequently despite losing 4,473,820 men in 1941 and another 7,369,278 men in 1942 the red army's field strength increased to 6,101,000 ib 2 feb 1942, 6,724,00 on 9 jul 1943 and 6,165,000 on 31 dec 1943.

these figures capture scole and scale of the red army's transformation in terms of size and overal config. in a less tangible sense they also ber striking witness to the army's ability to endure combat of unprecendented ferocity and proportion and yet still emerge intact. these cold & impersonal numbers also provide clear evidence of the red army's soldiers seemingly limitless capability for surviving amid excruciating suffering. 

[hatred of the enemy born of nationalism or ideological fervour together wil healthy doses of harsh discipline and official intimidation to say nothing of trad russ fatalism combined to sustain the red army in the field and to propel it intact through nearly ceaseless conflict]

@pg136
--
these staggering figures however do not adequately reflect the scope of the internal trnsf within the red army, which enabled it to compete with and ultimately defeat the vaunted german Wehrmacht. as large and impose as the red army's force struct was on paper in 1941, war proved it to be a cumbersome and inept military force ill equipped to contest the more tried and tested Wehrmacht. Size alone could not compensate for shortsighted strategic leadership, clumsy mobil, inflexible command and control at the op and tactical levels, and ill trained and ill equipped soldiers in the field.
  Consequently, the wehrmacht savaged the red army during the first six months of the war, wrecking both its prewar concepts for waging war and its mil forces. faced with seemingly limitless cascading calamities, the red army recoiled, trditong territory and solderis' lives for time.

in the last analysis, a combination of facotrs allowed the ussr and the rarmy to survive the war.
  1. the german army attempted to wage warfare in the immense expanse of eurasia employing strategic and operational techniques better suited to the more limited confines of west and cent europe. it was woefully ill prepared to operate in and cope with the unique terrain and climatic conditions in the ussr much less its vast territorial expanse
  2. excessive german ambition coupled with congenital overconfidence and a nearly constant inability on the part of the Armed Forces (OKW) and the Army High Commands (OKH) to define precise and achievable strategic objectives confounded the abilities of the even most talented of german field commanders. Time and again the Wehrmacht's reach exceeded its grasp.
  3. tho the ussr's mobil sys was slow and cumbersome, once set in motion it was inexorable, prod wave after wave of new armies which tho often scarcely worthy of the name repeatedly refilled the rarmy's depleted order of battle at times when the germans were convinced the sovs were down to their last battalians. quantity did matter both materially and psych. however weak the new armies were their existence and surprise appearance disconcerted german commanders
  4. (most important) the ability of ussr's political and mil leadership to adjust to a wide variety of nasty realities. despite its monumental initial failings, dire circumstances themselves impilled the sov strategic leadership principally stalin and the stavka (HQ of the Supreme High Command) to recognise that whole sale changes were required in the way in which it planned for and waged war.

  For the duration of what the ussr calls the great patriotic war, the sov armed forces 


=================
The World At Arms
Gehard L. Weinberg

pg 264
------
more ppl fought and died there than on all the other fronts of the war around the globe put together, due to three factors:
  massive size of the forces emgaged
  the nature of the fighting that made it unlikely that the to sides would return to peaceful relations
  the ability of germany's enemies to stick together and thereby insure germany's eventual defeat

the attack launched in operation br was a total surprise.
last minute aler to units on the front but orders were to hold fire in case it was a provocation

luftwafte at 60% of its strength using over 2700 destroyed a large portion of the soviet air force on the ground and shot down most of the soviet air force
the resulting total german control of the air did not last long but it was in effect in the early months of fighting and greatly facilitated the advance of germany's ground forces.

pg265
striking element in these rapid advances was not the large areas overrun so much as the huge soviet forces enveloped and destroyed by rapid armoured thrusts followed by an experienced and effectively fighting infantry

the germans very much wanted to destroy as much of the RA as close to the border as possible hoping that such terrific initial blows would topple the whole soviet structure. the one thing they did not want as a long campaign with a need to drive russians back slowly and frontrally for hundreds even thousands of mles.

these dramatic victories gave the german leadership at the very top the impression that they had accomplished their goals, to destroy soviet mil power in one hard blow.

pg 266
recognizing but not understanding the implications of the determined fight most RA men put up whether surrounded or being driven back the germans believed they had won the critical battle.

this impression of victory was heightened by the events of the first two weeks of july. in further great encirclement battles AGCenter now increased to five armies, swept into central russia

whole german campaign predicated on the assumption that it would be a short campaign. no replacements were available or planned for either personnel or equipment after the first weeks, and no one was worried about this situation. one of the astonishing features of the detailed situation maps kept by the germans is the absence of substantial numbers of formations in reserve, a characteristic of tese maps that would true until the last days of the campaign in the east. the air force exected to be back fighting the british after two months, most anti aircraft guns were at home or in the west. During July hitler and many german leaders believed that the gamble had paid off.

hitler expected new german border to be at the urals.

pg267
the bulk of the urban pop in Euro russia was to be starved to death, as would the captured RA soldiers, a subject on which hitler, his econ expert and the mil were all in agreement.

no rights to be allowed any remaining population last of all possibility of bearing arms. 

in those same days of late jul hitler also appears to have given instructions most likely verbally for the extension of the program for killing the jews in occupied soviet territories and among the pows to all the jews of german controlled europe. by this point the mass murder, which started in the first days of the invasion was by this time claiming thousands of lives daily. there had been lil objection and now was the time to expand proj.


pg268
in spite of the enormous losses in men and equipment suffered by the russians there was clearly both a continuing front and a steady if not yet massive stream of new formations and replacements. furthermore the men of the RA were fighting hard; there were local counter attacks and there were signs of revival from the red air force which the germans had misassessed both as to its frontline strength and replacement capabilities.

the soviet system was clearly holding together, and as word spread of thekilling of all captured political officers of the red army of the slaughter of numerous other prisoners of war and the horrendous mistreatment of the rest, the fate which awaited those who fell under german control began to become increasingly obvious to soviet citizens on both sides of the front.


pg269
earlist sisgns of an awakening can be detected in 2nd half of july by 1st week of august it was beginning to be recognized that teh caucasus and murmansk would prolly not be reached in 1941 and that the campaign could be expected to continue into the following year.

german units had to be refurbished and during the ensuing pause of late july and aug decisions ahd to be made as to the direction of the next offensives. the very fact that such decisions as to priorities for further major offensive ops were nec showed that the origi german plan to bring about the collapse of the ussr had failed.

if anyone still doubted this the heavy sov counter attacks on the central front removed them.

germans now had to decide whether to resume the offensive on the central front or in the south and north. the very fact that they could not repeat the earliler simultaneous offensives in all three sectors shows the weakening of german assault strenght or the lengthning of the front as they moved east and the obv. existence of soviet resistence. 

weinberg maintains that once they failed to topple them and could only seek to score tactical successes on one or another of the front segments they had already lots whatever chance they may have had to deafet the soviet union.


pg270
furthermore the germans were incapable of immediately resuming the offensive on the central portion of the front after they had reached the geo limits of the truck supply system that their initial adv depended on

whatever they planned to do next the first had to repair the railways so that these could bear the burden of logistical suport for ops further east.

pg272

meeting about 150 miles east of kiev army group center in september 41 led to the destruction of 600,000 sov forces but once again the stavka managed to build up a new front.

army group south took up most of the crimea and occupied much of the central and eastern ukraine culminating in the seizure of rostov at the mouht of the Don river in november but here the offensive strength was at an end. counter attacjs drive tgen iyt if ristiv abd tgys diined akk gernab hopes of cutting off the ussr's ability to transport oil from the caucasus oil fields to her armies and factories.

in two great armored breakthrough and evelopment operations the germans tore up the major soviet forces on that front and captured another 600,000 prisoners and moving within 50 miles of moscow. as german announcers procalimed victory (see colossus for more info on moscow?) and the soviet gov ecacutated most agencies there was a temp panic in moscow. but once again red army reseves, reformed units and scratch formations held a new front with grim determination even as german offensive strength waned cos of lost or worn out equipment, heavy casualties and a degree of exhaustion among the soldiers still fighting, which at the highest levels of the german command structure did not comprehend

pg273
they had to decide whether to make one more bid for moscow or to halt and try again the following year.

once again the very fact that the germans faced this choice reflects the extent to which their one campaign crush ussr effort had failed. all fighting in the last months og the year was predicated on the ass. that there would be another year of war in the east and that the question now was what was the best position for the german forces to be in as they anticipate the 42 campaign

they decided to have one more offensive towards moscow
  existing front line was not adv for a defense
  the real state of german troops was simply not understood at the top
  the continuing fighting capacity of the red army and slowly reviving air force was grossly underestimated and german intel was in eerror

germans had no real concept of the rate at which the soviets had been mob new forces to intro into the battle and so they were way off in their view of soviet power as to assert early in december that the red army had neither the bility or the intention of launching any sig. counter offensive.

the soviet western front (equiv to ger army group) held the germans in bitter fighting north west and south of moscow. during subsequent months hitler and other generals attributed their defeat in large part to the weather

pg274
lack of winter preparations ultimately did them in
germans at end of their offensive strength
they had not mobilized their society for war as thoroughly as the sovviet union and soviet leadership not only remained in effective control of the unoccupied portions of country but mustered its resources for a devastating blow at the invaders

pg278
stalin could not understand why germans would risk a two front war

pg279
disaster which over took the red army on june 22 was compounded by
  purges which decimated the officer corp of army navy and air force, leaving only grossly inexperienced people in charge
  faulty set of defense plans which played directly into the hands of the germans, defense and partisan warfare had been neglected because they were seen to be defeatist but the major defensive field works and positions along the '39 border had been denuded for a concentration of soviet forces in the newly acquired territories. spread over without adequate comm and supplies the red army was positioned in a manner and in locations best suited for the german plan to cut though surround and destroy the forces facing them. the annexations ironically contributed to the initial defeats rather than created a buffer zone to assist in the defense of the country
  incapacity of stalin to react quickly and reasonably to the german onslaught in the early hours of june 22. unable or unwilling to believe what was happening, moscow provided no useful orders or guidance to its soldiers on that crucical day. it took until noon for the govt to announce that war had started and orders culminated in a directive which completely unrealistically called for a large series of counter offensives to drive back the german army immediately. this meant that soviet armored forces were committed to combat in hasty 

pg280
and ill prepared battles in which heavy losses accomplished little except to weaken the red army's ability to develop a coherent defensive strategy.

soviet resistence continue in spite of frightful losses, the soviet command structure improvise

pg281
despite losing much of its industrial and agricultural capacity and its available supply or workers and potential soldiers, the russians not only held on grimly to moscow as they repelled germans in rostov in the south and tikhvin in the north, they were also preparing a substantial counter-offensive against the germans which was heaving itself forward at the end of its offensive strength with no substntial reserves whatsoever, operating on the belief that the ussr too had no further reserves which might be thrown into battle.

the ussr managed to counter attack for several reasons
  they managed to hold a front
  they had an string control of the regions not occupied by germans
  they had initiated major industrial dev in the urals and portions of central asia and siberia during the 30s which provided a ubstantial base for continued industrial production + massive program of evacuating industrial equipment along with tech specialists had rescued substantial industrial capacity from destruction or seizure - the remaining soviet capacity for war production was far greatter than the germans ever imagined
  managed to move experienced troops from east asia as they did not expect jp to attack and they got supplies from us, uk

pg291
having themselves helped the germans against the western powers earlier in the war, the russians now often assumed that the british and later the americans were deliberately following a similar policy. the fact that they carried such a large share of the burdens of war reinforced this view while it provoked reminders from their allies that the terrible situation they were now facing was of their own making

pg292
1st counter offensive launched in dec 5, surprising its allies as well as germans
with attacks at north and south, stretched german forces on the central front, exhausted and at the end of their own unsccesful and already halted attacks toward moscow cold not ocunt on any substantial reinforcements from the other segments of the front

their superior weather equipment and the fact that many of the attacking units were rested and not exhausted like the russians plus surprise gave them a substantial advantage, and they drove off german forces which had come closest to the city

the bitter fighting which ensued was marked by several sig chars
  red army was able to drive into german lines and force them back inflicting great losses on the whole central portion
  germans not only suffered heavy casualties from both combat and frost but also lost vast quantities of equipment not only to artillery but also cos they could not haul it back
  clear signs of panic in many german units as poorly clad soldiers in

pg293
  the most wretched weather faced an attacking foe that seemed likely to overwhlem them
  in spite of these hallmarks of a great sov victory the red army was not able to trap any large german units

  this victory led to new decisions of far reaching sig on both sides which in a manner neither Hitler or stalin could have anticipated interacted with each other.

  on german side the poss of the army being totally routed, driven into a demoral general retreat on the scale of napoleon's catastrophe and losing most of its equipment led hitler to order the german army group center to hold in place, risking a loss of the whole force. what reinforcements could be found would be rushed forward on whatever trains could be spared from the higher priority assigned to carting jews to slughter, but with no prepared lines to fall back on and no way to salvage the h. equip germans at the front had to fight where they stood even if lines got rboken
  simultaneously, there came a whole series of changes at the top.
    dece 19 hitler accepted resignation of commander in chief of german army and all three army group commanders and row of army comm were replaced.

pg294
however, german experienced coupled with russian inexperience and stalin's exceedingly ambitious general counter-offensive allowed them to hold temporarily.

pg295
at the same time they were just celebrating german defeat in moscow in mid dec, stalin was pushing for major counter offensives on other sectors of the front

now that the red army had retaken tikhvin in dec9, a large scale effort was to relieve leningrad and encurcle a large portion of AGN
rejecting the contrary advice of several Rarmy commanders, stalin ordered this series of offensives to take hold in early 42, but these were defeated after some initial success.

use of air supply in demyanks may have led hitler to overestimate its ability later on in stalingrad tho distances and size of troops were shorter and smaller

pg296
in spring of 1942 the holding of these areas appeared to have vindicated the winter battle tactics and leave behind a projection of the front which offered at least the appearance of an opportunity to close the gap to the german army group center still holding at rzhev.

other soviet counter offensives driven off, encircled and destroyed in spring. germans driven back but not encircled.

pg297
stalin had underestimated the resilience of the german forces, and in trying for too much at once, had led the red army to a major victory but without destroying the german army.

both sides now looked ahead to the summer campaign in 42. 
most of stalin's advisors recommended a defensive posture while the ussr rebuilt its mil power. Believing that the 42 summer offensive would be targeted at moscow, due to still small distance of 80 miles from german lines, and the tenacity with which they held on to rzhev, a palce with no visible importance to them except in connection with a new offensive towards moscow. hinted that it was a deception operation

not wanting to await the blow, stalin ordered a series of offensive ops in spring, hoping to disrupt german plans, but these were chrushed by germans, costing half a million in dead.

most germans still looked to the future with confidence.

pg298
hitler thought it could be won, having recognised erlier than most that the campaign in the east would continue into 1942.

major projects were undertaken to rebuild the german army, tho it would never regain its strength of summer 1941.

hundreds of thousands of german workers were transferred from industry to the army, instead of the anticipated reduction in # of div, there might have to be an increase. workers drafted were meant to be replaced by russian pows but these got starved or murdered.

new directive on armament issued on january 10 marks german recognition of the fact that the whole concept of a lightning war had failed.

pg299
the hope of reaching oil reserves of the CCs or at least denying them to the russians by cutting the routes from there to the rest of the ussr had been dashed by 1941 bu the successful resistance of the red army. this was now to be the highest priority for 1942. the conquest of the don basin and the caucasus would shift the industrial and oil resources to the germans and open up access to the middle east where they could maybe even meet the afrikacorps and even the japanese.

"the germans had come to the east to slaughter many and enslave the rest; certainly arming these people to fight alongside the germans was not the correct way to implement such a policy"

pg300
by feb1942 of the 3.9 million captured soviet prisoners, 2.8 mil were dead. at least a quarter mil were shot and the others died under the horrible conditions imposed on them by the germans.

as word of this spread out, on the russian side this had two significant effects:
  the shooting of some categories of prisoners, in part announced in german leaflets, as well as the rapid spread of knowledge of the fate of the rest served to spur the officers and soldiers of the red army to even more determined resistance. this was so obvious that a number of german generals urged the end of the policy of shooting captures comissars.

  the second effect of german reatment of the capture red army men was on the population of the occupied territories - the fate of th prisoners was in front of their eyes any who did not see the enclosures and marches where they died or were shot by the thousands would hear it by word of mouth:

pg301
here was an enemy who made even stalin's labour camps look humane (a considerable accomplishment)

murder squads impl decision to murder all jews in occupied areas; whereas shooting proved to be inefficient, the construction of specialised facilities soon followed in the fall of 1941. instead of bringing murderers to victims they started bringing victims to murderers and began the shipment of german jews in october 1941.

pg308
uk + us sign a decl that they would not declare peace independently

jp, de looked confidently on to the next year

pg348
possibility of german jp meeting in middle east looked like a real one, as germany saw success in north africa.

pg361
allied success in north africa precluded any meeting up of jp and de

pg408
as it was becoming evident that op br was not likely to be completed that year, germans began to think about operations in 1942.

the dramatic turn in december made it obvious that any 1942 campaign would start a substantial distance away from where the germans had envisioned as late as november

there wre additional complications affecting german offensive plans for 42.

casualties among the men and horses in the armies fighting the ussr had not been replaced; there were simply not enough of either to restore the army to its june 1941 strenghth

a shortage of horses made a war of movement on more than one segment of the front inmpossible.

pg409
lack of resources and manufacturing ability to restore army materiel made two choices clear for hitler and his advisors: the army could remain on the defensive in the east, an option for which there is no evidence it was ever seriously considered, or it could launch an offensive on one sector of the front; the 1941 option of striking in several sectors of the front simultaneously had vanished undr the blows of the red army and the needs of other theatres.

the only choice to be made was whwere to strike in the east, and on that regard it was easy to pick army group south as it was the group that retained the most coherent defensive line during the winter fighting and the weather there would be suitable for german offensive earlier than further north.

it was thus assumed that the prelim ops in the south could be cleared before prelim ops in the north and center, leaving more time for a summer offensive.

pg410
a second factor was the prospect of seizing oil resouces of the caucasus, which would have a triple impact on the war
  it would relieve the shortage of pretroleum products hampering the german armored forces, hindering the german and italian navy
  it would deprive the russians of a very high proportion of its oil resources
  a german force in the caucasus would be poised for an op the following year into iraq and iran from the north, collapsing the allied position in the middle east and traferring its oil resources from allied control to the axis and severing the sourthern supply route of the western allies to the ussr.

  along the road they could also seize portions of the important industrial region of the donets basin still under soviet control only made this whole direction even more inviting

pg411
  initially they placed no major emphasis on stalingrad in the planning for and early stages of a campaign that would come to be associated with that city

  situation for ussr was in some ways 
