Course Text: R.A.C. Parker, The Second World War, a short history, Oxford University Press, 2001

Marking

  3 seminars 15%
  
  2 pop quizzes 5% (best of two)

  Essay 25% - 
    to make it more fun you have the choice, go for the first item to come up with a paper to analuze or discuss a movie that deals with something in ww2. List provided on bb, not on list talk with him. Can submit an outline to discuss where you wanna go. (prolly should).

  Midterm 25% - 
    'document analysis', working on a historical document, 'useful to learn how to get the most out of a document'.
  
  Final 30% - 
    propaganda study, psychological warfare, bigger in ww2. Study ppgda posters, pictures. 


Lectures
  The Origins of ww2
  The Rise of Totalitarian Regimes
    Democracies in crisis; Italy & Germany, what they have in common
  German Blitzkrieg
  Battle of Britain
    First of .de's defeats.
  War in the pacific & the battle of midway
  Midterm (week before reading)
  Strategic Bombing
  Reading week Feb 16-20
  Battle of the Atlantic
    had the germans won this battle they wouldve won the war
  Peripheral strategies
  War propaganda
  Strtegic Deception
  Germany & Japan lost the economic war
  Hitler Stalin: war of extermination
  European resistence movements
    .de occupied 2/3rds of Europe
  the eowar in the pacific
    atomic bomb

Seminars
  Feb 2-6 doc analysis
  Mar 9-13 ww2 & propaganda
  mar 30 - apr 3 where does .de anti-semitism come from?

  group 1, 2 mon 11-12
  group 3, 4 mon 12-13
  5, 6 wed 9-10

@jan 12, 2008

the origins of the ww2

what happened? great war was supposed to be eoall war.

1919-1930s post ww1 era mgmt
early 1930s-1939 follow major downturn in 1929, things get rough, rise of national socialism.

The legacy of ww1 1919-1930
  nov11 1918 eoww1.
  Even though it was over, the war was still going on in central europe.
  Real problem in 1919 the disappearance of Austria Hungary, leaving behind a mass of small countries with conflicts over borders. Throughout 1920s war is waged over these borders.

  Paris peace conf
    major flaws:
      A congress of victors, a first in european history. previously, at the end of a war, all of the participants would gather and discuss the peace process. in 1815, napoleon lost finally and so in vienna peace conference france was invited. In Paris, Germany isn't invited until the end when it was time to sign the treaty, provoking a lot of resentment.
      All the major decisions were made by the council of Four (US, UK, FR, IT).
      Consequently, it looked like a Diktat, or 'imposed settlement'.

    Germany treated as the guilty party
      considered the sole cause, which allowed for
	- losing territories (Alsace-Lorraine, Polish corridor isolating east prussia). 10% of German territory, population, lost.
	- forced to disarm and demobolise its army down to 100,000 men. Eventually fuels resentment as .de is circled by powerful armies.
	- forced to pay war reparations, somehow.

      Western powers showed little sense of solidarity amongst themselves. 
	Disagreed on almost everything.
	Allied diplomacy greatly underestimated the problem of enforcement. Initially starting out to reform IR and present some form of collective security, except UK and FR had no intention to reform ways and removed all teeth from the League of Nations.
	UK worried eowar, now that .de is srsly weakened, that FR would become too powerful. UK FP based on 'balance of power', where no single nation on eu continent should dominate whole of europe.
	Highly suspicious at US commitment to change IR. Proven right as eventually US would not ratify treaty of versailles.
	Marshal Foch: "This is not peace; it is an Armistice for twenty years"

      Left with a series of countries who wouldn't mind repealing the treaty.

  The question of war reparations
    Article in treaty, .de "guilty of starting ww1", ergo must bear the consequences. At not time did .de want to pay these hefty reparations.
    Between the two wars, history of eu dominated by this issue.
    
    War reparations tied to another problem:
      - war debts; how did the FR and the UK manage to pay for their war effort? They borrowed heavily from the US. By eoww1, hugely in debt and war reparations appealing. 

    German inflation spikes and the economy is in shambles; UK & US are lenient but FR is having none of this and invade the Ruhr (the industrial heartland) in 1923. FR ultimately forced to leave.

  Resurgence of Germany
    mid 1920s, a new foreign minister Gustav Stresemann comes in.
      Taking advantage of UK/FR animosity, he plays them against each other. Seeking a compromise on issue of reparations, he convinces his debtors to go for international arbitration, calling in the US. Charles Dawes sits with UK and Fr and reach a compromise to pay until 1988. 
      Stresemann approaches US and says, if our economy is ruined we might actually have to undergo a revolution and become communist! That would be bad. Plz help us streghten our economy with some nice loans? US says sure!, as a stronger europe means more markets to exploit. New loans allowed them to repay reparations and bootstrap economy.
      Stresemann agrees to sign the Locarno pact with the French, recognising the border b/w FR and .de, finally stabilising relations.

  The EOVersailles treaty and the failure of collective security
    League of Nations
      war as last resort; 
      despite being started by Wilson, US never participates not wanting to get involved in other's affairs.
      only nations involved UK and FR, as IT, JP and DE leave in early 1930s
      League never possessed the means to enforce its own sanctions.

      - First challenge comes in 1931 as JP invades Manchuria.
	  JP reprimanded by League, and they leave.
      - Then, invasion of Ethiopia in 1935 by IT
	  One of the few indie African countries, Italy is all like why hullo thar and adds them to their colonies.
	  Emperor of Ethiopia travels to Geneva to plead his case and ask for help. UK and FR bicker over what to do, disagreeing, don't even apply sanction against Italy. Italy is just reprimanded, and they leave the League.

      Should League of Nations be an instrument of conciliation or a machine of security?

    The Great Depression and the Rise of Hitler to Power.
      1929 opened a world of pain, trashing .de and its US loans.
      1933 Hitler rose to power, one of first FP decisions pulls out of League of Nations.
	UK & FR, would the USSR be a counterweight to Hitler? Unwilling to compromise with the Bolsheviks, that fails.
      By 1920s, disarment talk fails as Hitler begins rearmament in 1930s.

    Remilitarization of the Rhineland
      Following Versailles, no .de troops were allowed in the Rhineland. Hitler quickly remilitarises the region. 
      FR & UK do nothing, allowing Hitler to grow in confidence.

    The Anschluss in 1938
      merger of germany and austria
	int'l reaction? Bad germans! Did nothing.
	Paralyzed by prospect of ww2.

  Why did Western Democracies not understand Hitler?
    FR & UK FP dominated by a double fear:
      Fear of war; srsly did not want to go to war again. FR lost so much in ww1 they developed conflict phobia, over 1.4 million soldiers. Ditto in UK, leading to a policy of appeasement.
      Fear of communism; Western democracies more worried about rise of USSR than Nazi Germany. Many ppl believed that .de would stand against threat of Commies; better the fascists than the commies sweeping through the rest of Europe.

  1938: the turning point
    German concept of 'peaceful aggression'. Hitler pretty pleased; basically, a combination of bluffing and threats. 
    Working beautifully since 1933, why stop? By 1938, Nazis had no intention at starting global war; Hitler's goal ultimately todestroy treaty of Versailles. 
    
    Next target was Czechoslovakia. 
      Why?
	Sudetenland populated by majority of Germans, nation created by Versailles. 
      Well armed and prepared to defend themselves, they built a powerful line of fortifications along the .de border. Also, the Czechs signed a formal .mil alliance with France. Germans are aware of this, so how are FR and UK going to react? All signs pointed to war.

      FR war phobic and more prepared to defend themselves. Initially prepared to intervene, but ultimately ready to forego its .mil alliances.

    Munich agreement in 1938
      UK & FR completely abandon Czechoslovakia, give it over to DE.
      Famous statement by Chamberlain, 'peace for our time', waving a paper signed by Hitler.
      Not seen very kindly by USSR.

      Ultimately, a recipe for disaster:
	FR & UK cross a new threshold in their appeasement, losing all credibility after abandoning their agreements, causing other countries to think twice before signing an agreement with UK & FR.
	FR & UK say, at the very least, we gained some time. We now know that Hitler is dangerous, we can now embark on rearmament. Problem was, Germans were also rearming very quickly. Germans were able to study French built line of fortifications in Czechoslovakia and learn its weakness. Czech army absorbed into DE army.
	USSR says, fuck those guys, decides to negotiate with Germans as well. 
	  In last days of Aug 1939 USSR DE sign non agression pact.
	
	Hitler's popularity explodes in Germany, doing whatever he pleases without consequences.
	Munich agreement led to war the following war, as Hitler becomes convinced that his peaceful aggression would work continuously and targets Poland.
	Problem was, after invading all of CZ, British and French stop believing they can avoid war permanently.

      Two days after DE invades Poland, FR & UK declare war.

@jan 14


# ah getting in late...

collective bonds to unite people;
hitler had mass rallies

use of propaganda to move opinion.

The vision of the 'new man'
  In .de - Creation of the new man who is going to be perfect, ostracizing the jews and idealizing 'the nordic ideal' blonde blue eyed man, racially pure.

  In USSR - 'classless society'. 

A charismatic leader
  vision of leader as a saviour. 
  Hitler when he gave a speech he would build up momentum in his speech, shouting by the end of it, mesmerizing his audience.
  Mussolini, similarly.

The one party state
  Create a new elite and new state ideology.
  Systematic censorship & propaganda allows the building of a consensus.
  Also builds a war philosophy.
    Basically, these totalitarian regimes have war at their essence, magnifying the perceived external threat in order to enhance internal cohesion, and promoting war as a means to purify society.
    Hitler said very early on that he was preparing for war.

  In art, 'nazi' promoting fatherland ideals vs 'degenerate' art.


The rise of communism in EEurope fuelled fascism.
  Although they had lots in common they hated each other.
  The failed communist revolution in HUngary led to a fascist regime.
  A general strike in Italy (Oct '22), dominated by It Commies, led to Mussolini's 'March On Rome'
  In Germany, the strenght of the Commies frightened the German conservatives and industrialists and led them to hand over power to Hitler.

Italy in the 1920s: The Cradle of Fascism

  'after all, it was [Mussolini] who shoed us that everything was possible'

Do remember, Hitler rose to power democratic means.

The Nazi Party
  Did poor in 1928 general elections.
  Yet in 1932 Nazi party had become the main political party in the land.
    Why?
      Economic downturn hit Germany particularly hard, being dependent on American loans which dried up immediately after the '29 crash. 
      Added to Versailles resentment, you have a perfect opportunity for hard liners to emerge.
      In 1935 the Nazi party flag became the German national flag in 1935.
  In 1932, #2 were the German commies, in GElections.
    Fearing the influence of Communism, German elites give the chancellorship to Hitler.

    One of the first actions the Nazis took was to burn down the Reichstag, the national parliament, blaming it on the Commies, basically ending the Commie Party in Germany.
      Hitler declares a state of emergency and assumes dictatorial powers, and from that point on Germany becomes a one-state party, and begin their plans for national cohesion.

  From '33-39, the Nazis gradually organize military parades, pick on the jews as the national scapegoat, agenda of spreading territory for breeding space.

  Hitler was ultimately convinced that FR & UK would not intervene.

Next week on monday, the initial victories of Germany.


@jan 19

the blitzkrieg (lightning war) from Poland to Russia 1939-1941
  military doctrine implemented by .de
  innovative use of tanks and aircraft, having appeared first in ww1. Initially they didn't do too well, as they were very slow. Post war improvement in technology allowed vast improvements in aircraft and tanks.
  
  Foundation of blitzkrieg
    Initially did not believe in future of the tank, but in ww1 were the first to introduce the idea of mobile warfare, as that war was characterized by static fronts.

    Elite "stormtrooper" infantry units in ww1. The idea behind them was speed and the element of surprise. If they could actually quickly surprise their enemies they could be successful at breaking the front and winning the war.
    Concentration - the idea that lots of tanks in one unit they become harder to defeat.

    Problem: speed & surprise is hard when you mostly have men on foot. 

    In 1930s General Guderian became one of the main bliz proponents, writing Achtung Panzer where he argues that a high concentration of fast moving tanks could break through enemy lines. 

    The Panzer divisions were meant to be a highly mobile miniature army, placing commanders close to the front, allowing them to be more flexible.
  
  The Invasion of Poland: the german plan
    Idea that the blitz was impl early on the war, but in fact was not initially welcomed by the high command or hitler, being highly skeptical.
    It was only at the last minute before the beginning of the invasion that it got adopted, becoming military doctrine only after the collapse of france.

    Sept 1 1939 .de invades Poland.
      Hitler felt that .de's strategic position was pretty good and that it was the right time to do it. Looking at the map, he got rid of the Czechs and signed a pact of non aggression with Russia, aiming to divide poland into two. Only significant challenge would come from Fr & UK, and he thought they would not move quickly, and that the US had no intention to intervene in Europe.
      Still a huge gamble on Hitler's part. .de was militarily strong but unable to wage a long lasting war; economically .de was no match for Fr & UK.

    The Polish plan
      Initially the pl army looked strong on paper, 1 million strong, but in reality Poland's flatness and was surrounded by points from which the germans can invade. 
      The Poles placed most of their troops at the border, to protect the rest of the country, but unfortunately for them they got screwed by the speed of the blitz.

    Blitzkrieg applied to Poland:
      No war declaration, and due to UK & Fr pressure Pl wasn't fully mobilised.
      Air force was the most important supporting element, bombing cities and civilians.
      The armies were mismatched, as Poles were limited to cavalry units.

    The invasion of France
      Invasion of Pl didn't say much, as their army wasn't that advanced. Sure we won there, but what about Fr? Fr at the time had the reputation of having the most powerful army in the world.

      Proved to be the most humiliating defeat in Fr history, as it took .de less time than it took to defeat Poland.
      Why did it happen?
	1919-1930
	  During the 20s, Fr is mostly preoccupied by its security, being concerned with Germany rising once again. Not as economically powerful or as populous.
	  In 1914 they allied with Russia, seeking to open another front on .de's eastern front.
	  Post ww1, chance of allying with Russia is nil. Seeking more alliances, they sign mil alliances w/Czechs, Pl

	  National mindset over the years migrated from an offensive strategy into a defensive mindset.
	  "The object of our mil org is to protect our borders and defend our overseas territories" - 1927

	  By 1939 fr army was very flawed, with a paralyzed high command and contradictory political interventions. They were also suffering a moral crisis due to ww1 losses (1.4 million young men), where they were not prepared to fight yet another long war.

	1930-1939
	  Germany is obv. a threat again.
	  Unable to win a war alone, they build the maginot line, a line of fortification built between 1930-1935. However, they only built it along the german border, running out of money just before they hit the border along belgium.

	French army 1939-1940
	  After invasion of Pl, Fr PM asked his commanders - are we ready to fight? Yes, but only a defensive war, beginning a misunderstanding.
	  Looking very impressive on paper, unfortunately they coul only gather 1.5 million.
	  While in 1918 they had the largest airforce, but by 1939 it was completely obsolete.
	  Very scattered decision making process, detached from the front line.
	  Faulty mil doctrine - concept of 'methodical battle'. Instead of autonomous, small tank divisions, they scattered tanks around the battlefield to support infantry.
	  Faulty plan around the Dyle; thinking protected by the maginot line and thinking they had an impassable border with luxembourg, when they invaded through .be they would be met with top French units. Except, in Jan 1940 Gen. Manstein introduces a different invasion route and hit them at the most vulnerable point in the Ardennes, despite difficult terrain.
	  Caught by surprise in the ardenne, they encircled the french army stuck in Belgium and marched on Paris. 4 weeks post invasion they sign armistice.

	Explaining .de victory
	  The greatest german weapon was surprise, attacking where they wre not supposed to.
	  fr unable to quickly adapt.
      
      Operation Barbarossa
	With the success of the French invasion. the blitz becomes std mil doctrine and decide it'd be a good idea to fuck with the USSR.

@jan 26


Wanted to cut off britain
Options:
  A siege
  Establishing air superiority over south eastern england
  Diplomatic effort over july 1940 hoping brits would come to their senses.

  Ultimate decided to bomb the fuck out of them.

Germans bombed the living shit out of guernica

German airforce (luftwafte) in 1940
  15 thou officers, 400,000 men.
  both a political and a mil weapon
  By the time Hitler rose to power in 33, the core of the luftwaffe existed and in 35 became a separate branch of the Wehrmacht (armed forces).

  Wehrmacht plagued with problems. Herman Goring appointed commander in chief of Luftwaffe. An early follower, turns out no the best of choices and was a pompous ass, creating many problems within the Air Force.

  36, Raf got reorged into commands
    Bomber
    Fighter
    Coastal
    Training

      Fighter command  gets new commander in chief in 36
	Something of an advantage.
	Get new planes, hurricane, spitfires superior to contemprorary german planes
	Hugh Dowding puts emphasis on new aircraft. Why don't we also build bombers? No, lets focus on building figthers, cos we'll need them.
	He also created a new air defense system, the Dowding system, still being used by all major airforces.

	Relies on a number of factors:
	  1 - Radar a brand new tech, giving them advance warning and direction of invaders.
	  2 - Information followed through by observers and a very flexible system.

Germans very complacent, as impressive as it looked in 1940, the *long-term state* of the Luftwaffe could be characterised by a simple sentence: "too little too late".

Germans were slow to increase aircraft production, with the British outpacing them for most of the war. Only designed for a short term war.

Operation "sealion"
  Idea was to get rid of british airforce, so you could proceed with actual invasion. Nazis tho didn't understand the economics of the war, but the 2nd problem was that it got planned really quickly, over a couple of weeks. Just not enough to proceed w/such a huge operation.
  As comparison, when allies landed thru normandy, they planned for two full years.

  German navy were like, dudes don't forget about the british navy. THey ain't gonna sit around waiting around. Very rigid plan, unflexible, poor logistical planning, got fucked by brit navy waiting around.

  Also, eventually, Hitler gets real complacent and makes lots of blunders (being the supreme mil commander).

  THE actual battle

  The battle can be divided into four phases. 
    10 July - 11 August: Kanalkampf, the channel battles
      .de tried to target any brit ship in the channel and destroy them
    12 August - 23 August Alderangriff, the early assault against the coastal airfields.
    24 August - 6 September The Luftwaffe targets the airfields. Critical phae of the battle.
      Not just on the coast but on the south as well. Even tho the dowding system was pretty flexible, they're going to ground all the aircraft and lose pilots. At the same time, the germans were also losing a lot of aircraft and pilots, hoping to win decisively by early Sept. Had they kept the airfield strategy within a week or two they would've won the battle of britain, but something is going to happen! around Sept6
      7 September onwards: Day attacks switch to London.
	Costliest blunder during the battle. Hitler gave the order to now focus all energy on british cities, particularly London and target civilians instead of the airfields, allowing them to rebuild and keep fighting.

	A battalion accidentally bombs London; until that point Hitler had insisted on not attacking cities. The British retaliate, even if it's symbolic, and decide to do a bombing raid on Berlin. This infuriated Hitler, and switches the strategy to target civilians.

	17 September, Operation Sealion was postponed indefinitely.
	  But by this point Hitler already planning invasion of USSR.
	  UK still standing, and now more resolved on fighting than ever.
	  Germans initiate a siege of the UK.

@jan 28

uh the battle of the atlantic.
four phases? last one in 1941 dec with entry of US into war

climaxes in early 1943 when germans start losing battle of atlantic cos of mass production of liberty ships and economic might of the US, and a change in strategy allowed them to sink more uboats than were being built.

only once the atlantic got secured were the UK and US free to launch their armies against german occupied europe.

@feb 2

identify people invovled in document
date & circumstances surrounding the document
identify the main themes
conclusion

fr govt as a result of german advance, was exremely divided with two main trends: we have to keep on fighting even if the fr govt has to leave france. 2nd trend, growing as germans are advancing, we have to surrender to stop the useless fighting.

people get their document and start writing immediately.
you have about two hours, read the document first, underline main ideas, then pen an outline before starting. if you dont you're going tobe very disjointed.

--
fr on verge of collapse

growing presure within fr cabinet to call for an armistice

reynaud isolated: fighting for his political life

roosevelt american isolation

reynaud says he is fighting for democracy

main themes:

1 - fr cannot resist much longer
2 - carry on fighting or capitulate?
3 - uk next on the list
4 - fr vanguard of democracies
5 - democracies vs totalitarian regimes

- conclusion
reynaud was forced to resign two days later

franco german armistice signed on june 22

gradual american involvement after fall of france but no direct involvement until pearl harbour

two items for next week - battle of britain, atlantic
in terms of authors, focus on winston churchill or roosevelt


@feb 11

strategic bombing
  began in ww1.
  in meanwhile aircraft tech improved a lot

  Invasion of Poland
    - Germans innovate in this regard, first example in ww2
    - The destruction of Warsaw
    Idea to create havoc behind enemy lines and target civvies.

  The Blitz and the bombing of brit cities
    Role of 'tactical bombing', idea to create havoc, a sense of panic.
  
  Rotterdam was LEVELED in 1940

  The destruction of coventry
    hitler init said lets not attack cities
    on british side similar sentiment, avoid retaliation of the germans

    after coventry, enemy morale became a prime target

  Bomber command in 1941
    few lessons oughtta been learned
      if you target civvies, they will rally with the gov't against the enemy, boosting morale

    at first they kind of have to learn how to bomb everything
    on going debate on the role of bomber command:
      is strategic bombing really worth it? aren't we taking away resources from primary targets?
	No, we're going to break their spirirt and win the war on our own!
      they end up without enough resources to effectively bomb

      2nd problem is that raf nav equip wasn't good enough to hit small targets like factories; for first couple of years they weren't v. effective
      
      3rd problem was that they focused on building fighters


  1942: turning point
    arthur harris lobbies for resources for strategic bombing.
      We have to increase the size and quality of our aircraft!
      get more crews and keep them
      bring new radar and electronic aids, notably the position fixing device Gee, into service

    In may 42 harris was instructed by the air ministry to begin ops aainst primary ind targets in .de and "focus on the morale of the enemy civ population"
    
    dude goes on a couple of ops, razes cities, creates incendiary bombs to fuck even more things, but with negligible effects despite mass homelessness.
    Ultimately a propaganda tool. It was hoped that they would leave the city of hamburg and spread the news

    The US enters the war
      us airforce is all like let's fuck up japan guys.
      Roosevelt is all like, lets do the strongest one first, germany

      while technically a big boost for the brits, when the us entered the war, the air force was small and not very well trained
	ulike the RAF, not independent force in 41
	the 8th us airforce was to endure a constant erosion of its strength
	preference for day strikes over night strikes

      German air defence system non existent
	cos they believed the war would be short
	first line of defence radar
	fighters 2nd line of defence, which fought nicely against unescorted bombers in the day
	3rd element searchlights and flak guns

      1943 - the building of a combined offensive
	lack of focus and resources tho, supposed to target morale and civvies and mil and industry and so on.

      Battle of the Ruhr
	Germany's industrial heartland
	idea on allied side, lets target this place guys
	they attack massively for a few weeks then they have to bomb other places, allowing the germans to strengthen their defence and rebuild everything

      Operation tidal wave
	why don't we target their oilfields in romania?

      again after a while they have to move on to target other things, and it gets rebuilt

      Suddenly there is another directive! June 43
	You guys also need to focus on the sub facilities in France
	Reduce the strenght of the LW by attacking its plants

      From the battle of berlin to dresden
	Allies struggle with the different targets 
	Berlin highly symbolic

	Aim from the getgo was to carry the war to the heart of germany
	  Operation Overlord, landing in Normandy
	
	Dresden got the shit bombed out of it
	  just at the end of the war in europe
	  yet they're like, lets fuck these guys up hardcore
	  Massively destroyed, huge losses of life, no one's actually sure why they decided to do it
	    Some historians are like, this was totally legit, it had a big railway network and it was were most cigarettes got produced

	  ultimately kind of pointless
      
@feb 23

battle of midway, coming of age of the aircraft carrier

ww1: a sea plane carrier, there was sea battle, 1916 jutman, the british had the largest fleet in the world, germans not too keen on a frontal attack with the british. For the first time in history the british are the first to transform a merchant ship to carry planes, allowing them to spot the german navy from the air. 

a problem however, the ship had to stop for landings and takeoffs. 

British experiment with new ways for planes to take off or land from moving ships, resulting in the aircraft carrier

eoww1 americans are like we kind of need sea power to pwn the oceans. Mahan - Whoever is master of the seas is master of the situation, american become 2nd largest naval power.

postww1 strong tendency towards armament reduction and FP isolationism. 
JP & US build lots of carriers. US under this naval agreement in the twenties when I wasn't paying attention, convert old battle cruisers to carriers.

By '39 the JP had 10 aircraft carriers (crazy how small the sea battles seem eh?), giving them the ability to launch 500 aircraft at any given time. By the outbreak of the war, JP had most threatening naval ability in the world. 
Consequences of the treaty of 1921 for Japan.
In 1914 JP had looked at the situation and said, hmm who should we ally with in re: our ntl interest? given their regional spheres of interest, allies were the strongest and de colonies the weakest, they were like oh hai there, lets keep'em.

JP in the process of building its empire in the Pacific; with bases scattered throughout the pacific and the conquest of China, JP became a real threat to US interests.

--

Japan's stregy till 1941:
  - Since the creation of its modern army and navy in the 2nd half of 1800s JP decided to emulate major eu powers: we have two options, we open ourselves up to the rest of the world and we emulate the europeans and start expanding, or otherwise we're going to be colonized by the europeans.

  To achieve this JP wanted China, which had a v. weak gov't at the time.

  This isn't exactly in the US' interests, who want free markets in the region, the "open door policy".

  The US' attitude in the FP realm influenced the making of JP's strategic policy in the region. The JP military begins to dominate the JP gov't in 1930s and start to expand.

  The jp in 1931 launch an attack on Manchuria. In 1937 the JP decide to launch an all out invasion of China. By the time the war in europe started, the JP were still fighthing in China. The install a puppet state and move south to expand.

  At the time the Chinese gov't was deeply weakened between the Nationalists and the Communists.

  In 1936, the emperor is presented with two documents re: jp's objectives
    - "the criteria for national policy"
    - the foreign policy of the empire

    Objectives:
      To eliminate the hegemonistic policies of the great powers in East Asia.

    They're aware that they are no match for the Americans in the long run.

    Problems:
      How would it be possible to provide enough officers and troops to the expanding military?
      Preparations for ware required the stockpiing of raw materials.
      Vast reserves if avuatuib abd duesek fuel had to b prepared.

      JP is srsly engagedi n China and can't find enough oil to continue; after the US boycott they find themselves in a do or die situation: they need to continue to expand.

      Both countries are on a collision course:
	JP allies itself with De and Italy, giving them the right to trample over fr indochina. The dutch east indies got oil. US issues oil embargo; JP starts to run out of iron, oil, scrap metal, forcing them to strike first to neutralise the pacific fleet so they can consolidate their position and sue for peace on their terms.

  Feb 1942 combined dutch british fleet defeated by the JP, and the JP go seemingly unopposed to the East Indies. 
  In April 42 in the coral sea, the JP suffer first setback, saving AUS from invasion. Following pearl harbour roosevelt decided to take some symbolic action for the benefit of the US public and sends aircraft to bomb tokyo.

  This shocked the JP so much that they decide to change their strategy and try to destroy once and for all what was left of the US fleet. They choose a spot in the S. Pacific to lure the Americans and destroy them.

  They figure Midway's a good place.

  For the first time two opposing fleets of air craft carriers try to attack over a distance. The US could read their messages and were aware of their plans. 

  Cruisers present only to pretect the carriers, all offensive postering was conventrated within the air groups. Sigintel is what allowed them to figure things out.

 The Battle
  thru luck they manage to spot them ahead of time; knowing only that they were being lured, and they destroy the aircraft carriers. JP never recovers from this huge loss, stopping its pacific expansion.

@mar 2

propagand is there to affect the minds and emotions of a group for a specific purpose, either
    
propaganda

traced to 1622 - congregation for the propagation of the Faith

Propaganda the effort to shape the thoughts and feelings of a human collective

british propaganda in ww1
  basically began modern propaganda
    only appears in britannica for thefirst time in 1922

  Wellington House

  Ministry of Information

  They even release a pamphlet explaining what they did during the war
    Hitler acknowledged that they borrowed heavily from this

Hollywood and WW2
  both JP and the US embraced similar techniques
    both aimed to build a strong nationalistic pride
    hatred for the enemy
    many movies became huge hits

The significant role of race in the war
  Nazi theories of Aryan supremacy

  Entente points out American hyprocrisy on arguing against their theories of racial supremacy
    what with segregation, widespread racial discrimination, immigration policies against non whites

US and UK dehumanize the japs
  notion of JP "subhuman" nature, unable to think for themselves.
  another stereotype emerged in 1942, when they become 'superhuman'

  JP constantly affirmed unique purity of their people

Treatment of Jap-Americans in US, CA
  roosevelt signs an execute order to remove all japanese americns from their homes and place them in camps so they cannot be a threat anymore.
  Approved by everyone in Washington at the time, obv very prejudiced and racist; msg highly symbolic, well japs are always japs, not true americans, seen as unable to assimilate to American values.
  
  "A viper is nonetheless a viper wherever the egg is hatched - so a Jap American, born of Jap aprets, grows up to be a Jap, not an American"
    LA Times

Japanese portrayed as animals, apes hanging from trees.
bustling hive of bees

Japs as ants - the more you killed the more that kept coming"

as they become harder and harder to kill their image starts to shift.

Advertising targeting women, buy war bonds!

Main themes of Jap propaganda
  Enemy's selfish desire for world conquest made war unavoidable
  America's track record criticised and exposed.

  Co-Prosperity Sphere

@mar 4

Mein Kampf
  two chapters on propaganda
  british 'ruthlessness'
  simple/repeatable messages

  idea that germans werent really beat, it was the home front that collapse

  while british were going on about their own exagerated propaganda, they starved 400,000 germans with their naval blockade
      You can be utterly ruthless as long as you cover it up with propaganda.
	The bigger the lie the more receptive the audience


Nazi propaganda in the elections of 30s
  Very prominent colours, the swastikas, a dagger stabbing a jewish snake from which all the problems of germany are sprouting from
  propaganda cliche, the jews are our misfortune.

  When Goebbels takes over the reigns, he becomesm uch more subtle.
    Simple iconography, simple, direct. A leader, strong, solitary
    'our last hope, hitler', a bunch of poorly dressed forlorn germans after the crash

    Hitler FLEW AROUND, very modern, "expected any minute".

  Goebbels' Rivals
    'poly-ocracy'
      Goebbels wasn't solely in charge or propaganda.
      Appoint three or four people and have them compete against each other

 Propaganda of distraction
  Nazis introduced highways, affordable cars, why think about fucking the jews
  Perfection of the mass rallies
  Radio, 'voice of the fuehrer'
  tv and movies
  'hypocrisy' propaganda.

April 1933 - boycott of jewish businesses
may 1933 - public book burning, a purifying of illicit elements
1937 - 'degenerate' art show
1938 reich Kristallnacht
  state organized riot against jews
1943 - 'total war'

Goebbels and the 'fuehrer myth'
  not only infallible but delivered to germany from providence
  their work in tandem would keep hitler aloof from everyday problems
Propaganda success tied to political/military success
  difficult to be convincing when you're being bombed
Suicide in may 1945.

@mar 16

strategic deception
british intel
  op bodyguard - deception about landing in normandy
  op overlord - actual landing

cliches & myths
  1 - the allies had an overwhelming advantage over germans
  2 - only americans had a really hard time, the cdn & uk landings were more succesful
  3 - the allies were not in full agreement over the planning of the op

Planning of the second front
  wanted to defeat germany as quickly as possible, this required a second front
  united states
    priority is to defeat germany, let's defeat germany first then focus on jp
  great britain
    idea of 'peripheral strategy'
    churchill one of first politicians to understand the role of russia postwar, desire to establish and maintain spheres of interest, willing to wait germans out and wear them down
  ussr
    desperate for a second front

  Tensions b/w british and americans
    churchill stalled for forever about opening another front, but ultimately roosevelt prevailed

  Logistics
    difficult choices over exact position of landing
      churchill wanted mediterranean, roosevelt western europe
    when you concentrate 100ks or men, it's noticeable
    the launch of a combined op was subordinated to the construction of trnsport ships
    reluctance of US admiral King to release ships from Pacific.

British deception operations
  possible cos they enjoyed two advantages
    sig intel
    high level of security achieved within britain
      they knew when german spies were sent to britain and fed them counter intel

  London controlling section
    to "prepare deception plans no a world wide basis with the obj of causing the enemy to waste his mil resources"

German intel services
  The OKW (oberkommando der Wehrmacht)
    supreme command
  Fremde Heere West (FHW)
    gathers and analyzes the intel info
    relied on a number of sources, reading codes, interrogation, diplomatic efforts, rely heavily on their agents
  The Abwehr
    actual intel dept

  due to rivalries between himmler and Canaris, himmler sets up a parallel dept, the FHW, which maintains an uneasy relationship with the Abwehr

Germans and the atlantic wall
  the moment they postponed sealion they knew they'd have to face them eventually, and build fortifications in northern france

Tehran conf
  agreement on opening another front

Hitler asks Rommel to take over in western europe
  Rommel believed that german would lose the war by then, but thought that if they could prevent them from landing they could negotiate on an equal footing

Germans build massive atlantic wall, with a patchwork of armament taken from all over their conquered areas, and staff them with older eastern european soldiers

absence of unity at the highest level of command
  at no time they had any idea of the exact location

  idea that they could defend in a massive counter attack
  idea that the americans were the 'italians of the alliance'

@mar 22

operation barbarossa: the concept of 'living space'

war against ussr decided by hitler
a new strategy against the jews and the slavs
  palnned to eliminate entire cities

effectively a war of extermination
  ww2 a said by hitler, just a set up to elminate slavs

"the communist octopus"
  by 1941 population wanted to leave war, but propaganda pushed the threat of ussr/bolshevism. 
  When hitler says Bolshevism there is a race element to it as well, and even call it judeo bolshevism.
  war pitched to hesitant germans as in their interest, supported by other nations
  "europe together against communism", pitched as a pre-emptive strike.

nuts and bolts of nazi rae policy
  racial hierarchy with aryans at the top
  a way to objectively to measure this human worth

  hitler as a short shrill lower class from the racially mixed area of austria isn't exactly a ubermensch, and goebbels had a shorter leg, a bit hypocritical but this wasn't taken up by the .de ppl
    this shows that the policy was nonsense
    how nazis sold the race policy to the germans
    
  arch enemy of nordic race are The Jews
    one of first regime challenges was to define jews, as many self identified as german
    somewhat positive they could find a blood test (a decade before discovery of dna), which of course failed

    1935 - Nuremburg laws
      anyone who had 1 jewish grandparent
      why weren't germans outraged by this blatant legislation, which kind of goes against traditional german values which were tending away from these tendencies
      gang violence was upsetting to the population

      around this time Hitler turns against the SA and kills hundreds of its leaders
      ultimately people were compelled to stay within the in group and much easier to turn the other way
      most people had not really met jews, unless they lived in an urban center

    Situation deterioated during Kristallnacht as nazi supporters went out and attacked jews and burned synagogues
      a signal to all germans that they wanted to carry out their radical fantasies
      by this point it was too hard to leave germany
	jews had a long history of persecution, well you know, this won't be too bad, hitler's gonna get overthrown.

      There aren't even that many jews in germany, but Poland's got a few millions.

they shipped off jews to various ghettos, but they required a 'final solution' to the 'jewish question'.

at first they just had mass shootings after being forced to dig their own mass graves.

the next step, starting in december 1941, was the establishment of 6 death camps.
  killed millions but designed to kill tens of millions.

  himmler
    in charge of the day to day operation of the camps
    would tour the various camps and would judge them on the efficiency
  eichmann
    took on the job of capturing and transporting jews to the camps
    actually a large logistical problem

"death factories"
  not before nor since have we ever seen conflict reach this level of cynicism.
  carbon monoxide required almost an hour, so they eventually settled on cyanide.

germany actively plundered other countries
  ain't gonna be the germans who gonna starve (Goering)
    millions were starved, forced to work

Resistence of Leningrad
  destruction of cities as nazi policy
  spanish royalist bombing as a test run for ww2

Barbarossa
  biggest land invasion ever, blitz created huge encirclements

Battle of Stalingrad: Total War
  funnily enough in late fall of 1941, it started to get really muddy which fucked the german army, and it started to get really cold

  germans have to revise their plans
    basically improvising, didn't expect this to last so long
    they could hit moscow, take out ports of murmansk where allied supplies come in but hitler settled on a drive to the south east - seeking to take over oil fields in the caucases

    they capture 95% of stalingrad
      brutal attrition war. If Stalingrad could be held out, they could mount a massive counter offensive behind the city, which the germans never saw coming. 

Battle of kursk
  after decisive victory in Stalingrad, Russians now in offensive.
  Soviets technically win, but Germans blunt the offensive.

  By 1944 Soviets launch counter offensive, on the anniversary of Barbarossa and completely destroy part of the german army. D-day was so succesful cos of this massive soviet offensive.

Japan and its global policy: the yamato race
  between 1940 and 45 jp's activites were all about securing their sphere of influence.
  many jp invaded lands sided with their colonizers - as the brutal jp regime was just awful

Stalin: bad strategist
  much like Hitler, Stalin took control of military
    where Hitler was evil, there is some debate whether he was crazy and his health deteriorates until eowar.
    Stalin, tho, we know was insane. Prolly a paranoid schizophrenic.

  Great purge 1937-8
    Paranoid his generals were plotting against him, and basically exterminated the entire leadership cadre of the army.
    By the time war breaks out this means that everyone in charge has no idea what they were doing, and they only got the job cos they were well connected, and massive soviet losses were a consequence of this

  to save "mother russia"
    Stalin now needed popular support and starts appealing to patriotism, which was kind of against initial internationalist communist ideals.
    churches were allowed to operate again as an agent for morale
    not so much that they were convinced by propaganda but they had no choice


    
