deal with the mythology of ataturk
  critica importance, legendary and absolutely pivotal to modern turkey

huge part of turkish identity, resent being lumped in with arabs
secularism and desire to maintain a strict republic is really kind of important, a main essay theme

biographical in what who where what, in ww1 where he becomes notorious for being a great general and abundantly fair and human and insisting that the commonwealth soldiers are properly buried and honoured

that echoes in his myth of him as this great v civ leader
myth of course cos he was very secular, alcoholic, been co-opted by almost everyboyd who wants to create a voice for turkey identity, tho not particularly we

how that mytho is uniquely turkish and how the international image is quite diff

useful to talk about young turk rev, how it plays in to the demise of ottoman tyrkish rule of empire, and to some degree tried to salvage empire and manage its decline and saw that going the way to a republic was pretty much the only way that this could be done and ct off the deadweight of the empire too heavy for anyone to manage

bio paper but do talk about his impact on international affairs at the time, how other people perceived him, like in london and paris. 

decline of ottoman empire. 



# writing essays

fundamentals:
  we don't think as a generation
  

  time
    research the fuck out of it
  space
    distraction will lead to disastrous essays
    properly cite it, don't literally take the words
    bullet points are better forms of note taking
    "your understanding, your words"

  style
    how we take research notes
    must have org. style, be methodical, same styling of page numbers, etc



--> research is everything for historians
  get expert help

  libraries, archives
  primary (gov pubs)
    first hand accounts, diaries, etc
    'goldmine'
    most western government have systemic well established info releasing
    can't be entirely primary ofc    

    NARA
      national archive record admin
      entire nat'l archives of us

    PRO (Brit archives)
      brit nat'l archive
      public record office

    FRUS
      foreign relations of US
      compilation of US state dept records broken by chronology and event
      usually div into geographical focuses
      'wonderful disclosure policy'
    
    Hansard
      transcript of parliament

    CWIHP
      cold war international history project
      
    CIAO
      columbia international affairs online

    WWI
      wwi.com ? usually has primary docs

    Avalon
      yale univ on ww2

'demonstrate you've done research, talk about it in the body of your essay'
  secondary
    someone has gone in and thought about whatever
    most stuff will be this, ideally a good balance


    ask the computer a few questions
    'layered research'
      go at it from a number of different cues
      filter down the topic for all secondary searches
      time line, other participants

      look into journals
      #look up kislenko journal articles


think about specifics vs contextual
  what is your _specific_ topic
  the contextual stuff is 'seeing the forest for the tree'
  go about the world around your specific topic.

  "so what?", explain the significance (other f. policies in ottoman empire)

  be exhaustive, demonstrate that you've seriously taken the research.
  7 or 8 good secondary sources (ugghgfjkhgfkhgsadaslhfdf)


Critical thinking
  in history, "how to think"
  take shit with a grain of salt
  think about what they're saying and challenge them
  questions we should ask:
    when was it written
      sources from the time period are often useless
      usually only good for opinions
      we need hindsight, distance on our topic
      generally speaking the most recent the source the better

    who is the author
      huge stuff
      bloody well sure that this author has qualifications
      find who the person is, what is their training, 
      journalists' audience are people who don't study history

    is it polemic
      argue for the reason of argument
      they are out to prove a point
      look for the tone and balance in their argument

      don't make a point and argue it through
      your sources should ask questions and give answers but should not be polemic; if you use them, balance them out

    what is their research?
    where is it published?
      golden rule: not all equal
      a rule: university presses are almost by definition not in the biz of making money but in the biz of scholarship.

Scholarly
  two styles of writing
  the narrative and the historiographical

  all essays will be part story, it will be a series of facts
  avg essay will do nothing but tell a story

  a sophisticated essay will try to include a debate on the debate, embrace that there are differing interpretations on facts; engaging the scholarship.

  'most historians agree that prime motivation was strategic, etc - however some historians maintain that strategic was secondary. in her book so and so argues that was appeasement his own politburo.'

  expose the debate. can id the book, schools of thought (requires research)


  needn't struggle to come up with a thesis first; it will appear to you at the end; research first. let it coooome to yoooou, go out there and have an experience.

  example of how to weigh in, what they insist upon to weigh in on an opinion only after presenting all of the other ones.

  'kislenko argues that an array of blah blah, however despite programs in place he offers no evidence that so and so was'. Never use a personal pronoun. "it's evident that", "this essay argues that"

  should have a general drift or argument


Writing style
  never ever write like you speak (or kislenko speaks)
  some words crept into the vernacular
  'milquetoast'
  have to be careful about how you write
  cardinal problems - and but never go at beginning.
  avoid being overly journalistic, scholarly audience

  'flowery' vs judicious
  paragraphs are small sacred children, no such thing as a one sentence paragraph. Transitions! to be used.

  not common knowledge or opinion, better to cite material.

  encourage the following: direct quotes only when its funny or powerful
  indirect citations - reword everything.

Be sophisticated.
  use appendices or exploratory notes
  a long footnote
  'bibliographic essay'
  always always give page numbers
