hst504

office jor 510
mon 15:10-17:00
wed 12:10-15:00

'designed to dispell mythologies'

kislenko.com

iid.kislenko.com

#sept 14

website password for maps:
  history
  akhook

signups for seminar - two hr block on monday

first for all hst never starts when we say it starts
dates are kind of arbitrary

hst truisms
  exact dates are unimportant
  about themes and ideas, ideas drive history
  pick major intellectual events to launch a course
  don't think of hst as little components; a sort of river in to which all sorts of diff things flow and drive it forward
  n. americans are ahistorical
  don't view it as ancient, abstract, etc.
  people are not that simple, so hst isn't simple
  a lot of ww1 docs have never seen the light of day, all sorts of gaps in the hst record, constant change in perspective.


FR rev 1789
  is still every day in your face - we just choose to ignore it here in namerica. We don't have to!
    profoundly ignorant
  when we talk about rights for people, we are in effect echoing the sentiments of the FR rev, most places in the world are still working out the consequences; words we use every day - freedom, egalitarian, rights, where do they come from?
  'these great ideas' infuse every aspect
  for our course the most important idea, the best ism here,
    NATIONALISM
      we all think we understand.
      put together it's prolly most misleading word, esp. to canadians, it's nice and passive
      every where else it is a violent proposition
      once you start defining yourself by any means or measures you automatically exclude other people
      "modern engine of history"
	almost always very powerful, difficult, cancerous idea

      nations are the most important identifiers in the world we live in
      a phenomena of 18th and 19th century, starting in rev.

      prior to this no one really dealt with the concept

      15, 16, 17th century
	live to the age of 30, it generally sucks, no concept beyond your immediate sustenance and surrounding
	"who rules this place?"
	  the landlord, maybe local aristocrat
	  have you been to this town '50km away?'
	
	only 20th century has tourism started, 90% would never go beyond 50km away
	what is identification?
	  I raise cattle, I'm gendered, I speak foo
	  a serf of the duke of orleans
	  concept of belonging to a nation state doesn't exist for most people, except the tiny minority educated, in gov't, etc.
	  
	provinces might fight together, sometimes
	
	Another great truism:
	  Revolutions occur on basic commonalities
	  basic human reactions to basic conditions
	   seek profound change, "I'm hungry"

	  revolutionARIES are intellectual and frequently evil
	    bulk are avg peasants who are pissed off
	    you don't see fat revolutionaries
	
	FR is devastated by endless wars and terrible systems of politics

	it is in the fr rev they proclaim basically most ideas of equality
    
    at first they only wanted incremental change, but it quickly gets out of control
      they first associate the king with everything that is bad
	successive waves where more people influence the course until it hits the massive in the streets (who are basically angry at everybody)

      the king himself louis xvi 'apres moi le deluge'
	once you get rid of the system, who knows what follows

    'la revolution mange ses enfants'
      revolutionaries often become the victims of the revolution itself
	read tale of two cities

      Fr aristocracy is either killed off or forced into exile
      decide to create an entire new system of religion
	'cult of the supreme being'
      destroyed the calendar
      implemented the tricolor flag of france, national anthem

    Suddenly a bunch of peasants start to identify as 'french'. unprecedented; 
      this concept starts to spread
      for the first time ever people start to identify as groups of people — people are always striving to belong to something bigger
	conscription - what a better way to get people to clump together?

    Now that they are weak, everyone else in Europe invades:
    Revolutionary Wars 1789-1793
      all aristocratic houses related
      doesn't hurt that marie antoinette was related to the leader of the austro hungarian empire
	Now they are not only killing each other, they are also being invaded by everybody

      funnily enough, the french win big — once attacked they begin to take the identity to heart.

    
    France begins to stabilize and hungry with ambition and revenge:
    Napoleonic Wars 1801-1815

      Napoleon Bonaparte
	born in corsiga
	one of the greatest figures in hst, a product of fr revol
	not terribly wealthy background
	  without the revolution he would never have made it big
	
	definitely a dictator
	also a revolutionary
	  distinguishes himself by killing rioting people

	ahead of the time, believed in universal education
	  relatively free press
	believed in new governance, new economic system

	-> fundamentally changes Europe and the nature of the revolution
	
	by 1801 he rose thru the military and supplanted the revolutionary leadership, eventually becomes supreme leader of france
	  crowns himself as emperor - revolution has ceased to exist
	    even more powerful than a kind or the pope

	  yet not simply a dictator; 
	    most fr people support him absolutely
	      stupid and apathetic
	      most people forget stuff quickly
	    believes in some of the ideals, mass participation 
	      -> you can't stop an idea whose time has come.
	
	France by this stage is stable and very powerful.

      The revolution quickly spreads to nearby areas, the french turn out to be a really good army
	soldiers start to spread the idea
	people love a winner
     
     Nationalism spread thru language, the lowest common denominator
     Language draws borders - once nationalism mrches thru the old mixed empires are done for.
      --> Linguistic nationalism is the exact antithesis of empire.

      Wherever Napoleon's armies go this concept stretches and infects
	Language is the first thing that draws people together

      As his armies march across the centre of Europe they cross the germanic states, a criss cross of districts and territories dvidied by religion. 
	But they speak basically the same language.

      1812, Napoleon sets off for Russia, uh, in June
	"Don't fuck with Russia"
	  physically speaking biggest country of the world
	  geography is certainly important
	  time honored Russian traditions:
	    suffer
	    strategically retreat
	
	it gets really wet in sept
	  whole carts of horses disappeared in mud fields
	  and then it freezes over

	5/6ths of his army disappear in Russia.
	Huge unmitigated disaster

	People now rise up against the French

    Over the course of the next five or six decades the FR Rev ideas will change central europe; almost overnight a massive empire assembles in Germany as people assemble.

    Not only just in Europe; in Japan opens up in 1868 based on American diplomacy and now begins to think in terms of empire and nation
    1867 in Canada; 1861-65 US becomes a unified country

    Basically every country in the 19th century undergoes a nationalist change — *everything* changes

    The problem then becomes everyone who aspires to nationhood but then don't achieve it.


    Most of the time most people identify peacfully; unfortunate a lot of the time the moment you start identifying you exclude a lot of other people, which takes on militant proportions and extreme nationalism. 
      gotta get rid of the other people

    
    Napoleon's system collapses, until he comes back, escapes from prison, rebuilds another army and in june 1815 he has one last great battle in Waterloo, Belgium
    

    How do we undo this spectre of ideas?
    The great powers of Europe come together (Austria, Ottoman, UK, Russians, Prussia) and dictate a peace to France in the Congress of Vienna, the first of its kind.
      How do we now create a world in the absence of Napoleon?

      --> The Concert of Europe/Congress of Vienna system (historical term)
	notion of running the show in a beautiful congress
	two determinations
	  1. Make sure nationalism is CRUSHED
	    exact opposite of empire
	    whether by force or coersion, make sure nationalist id don't exist (some take it literally and kill them)
	    every empire tries this, keep the balance of power.
	  2. Make sure another dictator like Napoleon never manages to come into power
	    That's how they were to act in 'concert'

	  --> implicitly, you create alliances so we can come together and make sure everybody knows their place
	  unfortunately, the world does not work that way



  Ottoman Empire
    stretches from the cusp of Europe, the balkans to north africa
    all sorts of ethnicities and cultures


revolutionary wars 1789-1793
napoleonic wars 1801-1815


Sept 21

sign up online
just one section



1754-1856 crimean
us civil
1866 austro prussian war
1866-68 danish wars
1870-71 franco prussian war
alsace, lorraine

'pressures for war'
  exert tremendous negative influence on the balance of power (empires)
  tracing the collapse of the intl order as we know it post 1815
  concert of europe system couldn't predict the future
    the principles are very loose
    nationalism is antithetical to empire

  no one was stupid enough to say 'there will be no more wars'
  what they were trying to do was limit the conflicts so that none of the great powers fought them or fought them in tandem

  Powers:
  Acting in unison, intermarried for centuries. Not ideologically different.
  Sense of tragedy and heaviness at heart - going to war against family members, with like minded people. Lots in common

    britain - rules the waves, sun never sets
    france
    austrian empire/austro-hungarian
    russia
    ottoman empire
      most culturally distracted, but not another world
      tended to be seen as quite different, but they're not totally foreign
    the german states, soon to become germany

    All fundamentally in agreement that they don't want a big war where everyone lines up against each other.
    ww1 was no surprise - a war is very likely to happen, inevitable
    tragic in that everyone was aware of these pressures

  Def of empire/power in 19th century - colonies and navies.

Big war
  --> Crimea: 1854-1856
    Southernmost tip of Russia, always biggest country in the world
    A certain tragedy to being Russia, it is surrounded by cold, useless ocean	grossly limited in navy
    The black sea on the other hand is sadly totally surrounded by the ottoman empire, who control these two bottlenecks.

    This yields a natural desire to fuck up the ottomans; the straits are tiny and easy to defend

    How do the UK and FR respond?
      Well shit, I guess we should side with Ottoman, can't let the ruskis get too big.
      Balance of power?
	The other powers don't show up.
	They send 'limited' armies that don't fight very well (this part unintended)

    War ends as a tie - but the Russian empire ends up denied access to the straits. Balance of power is maintained. The ydon't want anyone to lose really badly.

    Only accomplishment (russians never forget)
      srsly offended, harbour uk and fr resentment.

  #####
  --> US civil war 1861-1865
    Wasn't rly over slavery but the concept of states' rights.
    How an indiv state in the union views itself relative to the fed gov't
    War b/w Union (N) and the Confederacy (S).
      
    What does it have to do with intl order?
      UK very nearly found itself drawn to the war, to intervene on the side of the confederacy over cotton production
      Massively important for their textile industry, fuel for the industrial revolution, trade.
      Where is cotton also grown in Egypt and India, the other major cotton producers. Control of cotton represents an econ monopoly and essential for empire.

    At the eocivil war it becomes a true country. US has massive resources, once it spans the continent.

    American potential begins here.
    Surrounded by a giant moat and lacking natural enemies.

    Begins to change balance of power.

  #####
  --> 1866 Austro-Prussian War, 1866-68 Danish war
    Problem's abrewin'

    Nationalism running its course, the Danes and the Germans start to itch for independence.

    In Prussia, you start to have a real desire for a German confederation, nationhood. Prussian initiate the German states start to drawn upon themselves.

    Austria is all like fuuuuck thaaaat, but they fail.
      Other nationalities start to do the same. 
      Hungarians agitate, Austrians make a deal:
	We'll call ourselves the Austro-Hungarian, stick around and we'll give you an army and all that, dual monarchy

    Austrian Empire is desperate to maintain itself.

    How do the other powers respond to this?
      Other powers might supply some of the sides, but they do not get involved.

      Ethno linguistic map of the balkans, Hungarian has nothing to do with all the other langs in the region.
      Everyone else are Slavs. Fuck ton of minor ethnicities, but related to Russia; local crisis between these peeps, the Russians see them as cousins and are interested in bringing them into their empire. 
      Serbs are all like, Russia our buddies!

      Austria left to also fight all these Slavs. They are kind of fucked.

    --> In the 19th century we refer to the ottoman empire and the austro-hungarian empire as 'the sick men of europe'.
      Dying from within from the cancer of nationalism. Most acute in these countries. They collide in the same place (S. Europe)


  ####
  --> Franco-Prussian 1870-1871
    The one that challenges the intl order the most
    Leads to creation of Germany

    In terms of a people, DE is a very old place. Most philosophers, classical musicians, culture is old.

    German states divided by religion, lang dialects. Nationalist desire swells up, driven by intellectuals and leaders.

    1850s-1870s Prussia starts to get other peeps to join in to the idea of German unification. 
    Some remain with the Austrians but the momentum becomes very great.

    Post 1866 Prussia feels like it can use force other peeps to join.

    French do not like this.
      Balance of power gets fucked up.
      Mishmash of small states > giant german power
      Nobody exactly thrilled by this.

    Alsace and Lorraine
      The peeps in there are both FR and DE speakers. 
      Prussians want them in the confed, FR says le no

      No one else gets involved, disrupt balance of power.
      Fr seemed to poised to crush them

    Surprisingly, they totally fuck up the French brutally.
      Unification becomes a fait acompli.

    German army marches all the way to Versailles and proclaim unification.
    Immediately become massive power, becomes #1 industrial power.
      This rubs the Fr the wrong way.

    Balance of power totally fucked up.


Germany as a great power
  Would like to have a massive navy, colonies, immediately tweaks the British in the wrong way
    No colonies left aside from chunks of Africa.
    By late 19th century, race for Africa the last unspoiled part of the world.
    1885-1914 completely changes face of Africa

    Germans get Tanzania, kind of shitty. The German Cameroons, SouthWest Africa/Namibia - all desert. Brits have Egypt, and then the Suez canal. South Africa, which is fabolously rich, Nigeria and the Gold Coast (Ghana).
      Germans are so desperate they take anything free. One of the Hawaian islands. Little city states in China.

  What does this leave? You can take things by force.

  If you're France and Russia, you're scared. Giant power who does not like you. They ally each other as a safeguard - but this comes at a price.


  The British on the other hand... eh they are related. They don't *hate* each other. They definitely don't like the French nor the Russians. Their royal families are related. Natural allies.


Once more: overwhelming tragedy is that ww1 is a war that never should've happened. About 50% of the Germans on one side spoke great English. 

Unifcation of Germany: problematic. 
But nothing compared to the crisis in the Balkans.
  For 40 years prior ot ww1 everyone coulda told you that a war was coming.
  The Powder Keg of Europe

  --> 1878
    Serbia, one of the most militant of the Slavic nations, wanted nationhood. Start to demand more and more of the Aus-Hun empire; they can't submit or else they will cease to exist. Give into Serbia and everyone else will want in.
    They start to give certain powers like taxation and its own police force. The real trouble becomes when the Serbs start talking about the adjacent territories filled with Serb nationalists. Very nearly leads to war.

    Aus-Hun is prepared to fuck up the Serbs and make them an example.
      But! The Russians might have a problem with this and the Germans will find ways to make their influence felt.

    Good news: No war. Bad news: Gets postponed to 1914.
    The Russians back down, withdraw - the Tsar is forced to back down by the Germans who hint that they will flex a muscle, 'Never again, by god. never again' - Never again back down.  

    By 1878 all the ingredients for war are present.

###
Int'l pressures for war:
  1899-1901 Boer War
    Brits finds itself fighting a guerrila insurgency against dutch and german farmers aiming to create an independent homeland
    Brits squash them; takes them two years.

    Their empire goes to war; Canadians went to fight. 
    Germans secretely help the Boers.

  1898-1900 Spanish American War
    Spain has descended into chaos, and the US ostensibly goes to war over Cuba to 'protect it'. Within a few weeks US inherits a global empire, getting Dom Rep, Puerto Rico, the Phillipines. 

    Balance of power becomes totally different, new world order.

  1900 Boxer Rebellion
    Lots of Chinese nationalists (read: anti western) upset over the steep decay of its old empire. Get crushed.

    'Fists of Harmonious Righteousness' -> Boxers

    China became a buffet for westerners to pick over.

  Balance becomes too fragmented for the Concert to keep working.
  Change is seldom peaceable, it's terrifying. Most nations completely freak out at the pace of change.

  Not only do they have to deal with this, they now have to face ideology and epidemics.


####sept 23

Nationalism - ugly, brutal, most conflicts, not patriotism
19th century phenomena - no such thing as nation states prior.

Throughout 19th century gets lucky - the balance of power remains unchllenged.

Imperial nationalism starts to spread.
The balance of power est. after 1815 starts to crumble.

Italian unification in 1860-1868 comes across. Coming together of states into 'Italy', the concept of which didn't really exist prior.
Similarly, German unification - old culture, old history, new state.
Can even talk about US eocivil war, or even Canada's confederation (unimportant tho).

Japan - an old old place, the oldest dynasty in history, it's not *created* in 19th century, but then it becomes a country in the modern sense. 
  1868 japan 'opens up' to the western world. 
  Genie out of the bottle syndrome

Various pressures - econ competition, imperial competition, nationalism
--> Alliances (are complicated) come in different shapes and forms
  Loose and binding alliances
  At their ultimate extent are binding agreements
      Nations don't really care about binding agreements? Mostly true, but there are srs consequences for not following thru on alliances
      What are these consequences? 
      Loss of credibility leading to immediate diplomatic isolation, which is almost as dangerous as going to war

  These powers are abundantly the same, no ideological conflict, up to this stage alliances are impermanent when you don't believe in much. 
  All of them understand the dangers of alliances
  
Hit list of the great powers:
Roughly speaking, all europeans
  UK
    At the time most important, Britannia owns the waves, best in the world
    At the sea almost undefeatable, also controls all the choice colonies
    Nobody in 1815 during the concert of europe ever wanted a power supreme;
    UK is not a dictatorship, they do not want to control the whole world
    They want to be a preeminent power but a lot of it was accumulative, no actual you know planning, no anticipation
    By 1900 you have one power that is much larger than the others
    Most political stable for several hundred years, parliamentary democracy, have had their civil wars they were long before other nations. Encourages econ growth, which enables them to control industrial revolution and build ships and go out and conquer.
    by 1890 uk controls 50% of ALL global trade goes thru London, 50% of all finance comes out of London. No one else has ever achieved that much predominance


  DE
    The Germanic states unifying in 1861, the diplomatic equiv of an atom bomb.
    Huge effect on global affairs, strategically located.
    FR and Russ hugely worried
    When it unifies it becomes the \#1 producer of iron ore and coal in the world
    Might seem like bad news which UK dislikes - but its a resource rich econ without an industrial infrastructure (which they can buy from UK)
    Very fast studies, stereotypical ruthless efficiency
    In 30 yrs its economy expands threefold. 
    Both DE and UK dislike the French, they're pretty similar, royal families are related
    Best educated system, more Germans are literate than anyone else 
      Which makes a much greater army

    Old history leads to a really deep sense of intellectually founded nationalism


  FR
    Also profoundly arrogant
    Terribly concerned with this new germany business, Humiliated by them

    Going through this immense industrial growth, but its empire is second fiddle at best and its in far flung places
    Rehabilitated itself considerably from Napoleon - the UK find them less disagreeable by late 19th century.
    Something really unusual is happening: as you get wealthier and more educated the opportunity of having large families drops dramatically; poverty leads to more kids.
      France can no longer field such an army; Germans on the other hand have programs to increase fertility.
      By 1890s Germany has surpassed them in population and industry
    

  Aus-Hun
    Ethnic nightmare; the sick men of europe
    Economically developed state; not some backwater
    The problem is that its econ industrialism is uneven. Austria is doing great but large tracts really are backwards.

    Lost German & Italian states, filled with wars from within

  Ottoman Empire
    Also very much an economic power house, also fucked by nationalism
    Got so many different ethnicities it doesn't even make sense


  Russ
    The most curious and problematic
    Geographically the largest. Just fucking huge.
    Doesnt have overseas coloniesb ut its an empire; roughly 50% of the pop is not russian. 
    It's army is massive, but its the most cuorrupt and complicated, least econ viable and therefore the least capable of fighting a modern war.




  If you're the British, you view the spectre of war with caution
  What they are most concerned about is anything that would force them to go to war when they don't want to.
  Alliances screw this up; likely to get stuck doing something it has no interest in.

  The richer and more powerful UK gets the more anxious it gets to stay away from the continent. By late 19th century UK diplomacy is governed by concept of 'splendid isolation'. Not to be confused with isolationism.
  Literally mentions this in a speech, talking about entanglements with Europe. It's good to be isolated from the Continent.

  With UK out of the equation, the other more or less equal powers balance each other out.
  

  So you're another power and you want more - what do you do? You emulate #1
  --> Germany starts a massive shipbuilding program.
    British goes waaaait a second there.
    Britain decides to leave its splendid isolation and join an alliance.
    Britain is a huge question mark until July 1914.

#sep28

#essay lecture
tues oct 13 4-6 eph204
thur oct 15 4-6 eph225

ww1: most important event in history

Thinks about the shifts that have happened way beyond just the mil and political consequences. Women become economically empowered, political leverage goes up

Name a facet of life and ww1 has a tangible effect on it.

Italy was never a great power yet during the course of the war and after it will gain this status.

Italy by virtue of being a new country goes thru some really really dramatic ideological shifts during the course of ww1, it's in the two new countries and japan where the old empire becomes a new country that starts to breed ideological extremism.

Real no ideological diff in Empire;

Balance of power:
  US' existence fundamentally changes it
    massive, not interested in imperialism
    if we went to war in europe, how would we view the US as the land of milk and honey
    what is the US gonna do? which shifts european game

  Same as Japan
    Not white nor european. 
    Brings to the table a distinctly different view of the world
    Sent their kids to school in Europe, fluent in FR,, EN, DE
    Think like westerners in many respects, but they are *not* westerners

  Representative of this, Serbia
    Example of how nationalism from within, this cancer, becomes a fundamental geopolitical problem (instead of just intellectual).
    Works in fairly predictable fashion

    Painful exercise

    Nationalism is everything, inclusivity who you are and who you are not
    Prime example of how militant nationalism becomes a real physical problem for Europe. Aus-Hun cannot manage Serbia; to give into them would be giving away the Slavs, which is a large part of the Empire. 

    Serbias nationalism represents a 'pan slavism'
    They do try hard to accede to their demands, the serbians really got their act together and got good at defining the concept of nationhood. 

    --> Identities are constructed, very fluid.

    Serbs are masters at inventing a history. A group of elites will create an identity, a sense of belonging and convince people. 

    Unfortunately, they've also claimed land that is inhabited by people who do not necessarily identify as serbians.

    Ethnic identities are literally made up. 

    In addition to all these imperial struggles, we now have to deal with this very agressive entity named Serbia.

    Serbia has a thirst for autonomy, which gets acceded to. Aus-Hun cannot give it total indepence without destroying the empire.

    How do they become so unified? System of education, fairy tales. Very powerful, caustic nationalism. Most famous is the group called the Black Hand. 	Good news: not representative of all of Serbia
	Bad news: terrorists, they want to disrupt Aus Hun, operate in high circles of the Serb government. 
	If you study some of their opinions, they talked about 'exclusionary nationalism' from the very start (i.e. ethnic cleansing). 

    Very aggressive claims of territory as in Bosnia, which the Serbians want for their own nation. Only an example of many other places of the world.


Balkans wars: 1878, 1911-1913
  first one, russians backed down

  There are three separate wars in the Balkans, all small, all involving the Balkan players themselves. Everybody fights everybody, fucked up, complicated.



---> Finally, more isms. Later 19th century phenomena
Like FR Revolution, Industr. Revol spawns new ways of thinking about hte world

  Socialism/Marxism
    Gonna meet directly at eoww1, goes from concept to physical reality when Russia falls in 1917.
    Began in 19th century, a product of the industrial revolution.
    Karl Marx, a german born jew, writes about class warfare, in the midst of the industrial revolution in England in exile (cos he's a shit disturber).Challenges the balance of power. 
    
    All these empires: remarkably similar, aren't many distrinctions between them. No one had a particular ideology, until these theories of human history start to come about.


  Social Darwinism
    Evolutionary biology, 'survival of the fittest', some plants and animals are just better at surviving along. Just better equipped than others.

    People extrapolate from this and came up with a persuasive yet terribly cynical justfication for colonialism
      cos they *should*, they're better equipped to run the world

    Mixed in with religion, all empires validate themselves with this righteousness. 'white mans burden', our burden to go out and civilize peeps, white peeps are just better
    It also justifies wars between Empires.

    The concept becomes prevalent amongst all of the top elites. 


  Militarism
    Think you might understand the def thru the etymology, like with ntinlism, but not quite.

    A love of military, to further it, sure.
    Also implies that there is an economic system designed to support the propagation of ones armed forces, actually implies an economic control system - a managed economy, as the pressures of war mount they will increasingly intervene in their economies to drive them to war.

    An effort to manage these giant imperial economies and prepare them for war; not just liking one's army.

    In late 19th century, we need to understand the minutia. You could have the world's largest army (like RUSS) or all sorts of resources and still be absolutely be unprepares for war. The reason is the minutia - on paper it's a huge empire. In reality it does not have enough shoes or food for its army. Largely illiterate. Mass bits of the army will starve to death.

    Need to make sure you have all the adequate logistics; directed economy is required. 

    --> This leads us to an 'arms race'.
      Prevalent from the dawn of time, just a human tendency. 
      Very specific: the Navy.

      Ships generally designed to do different things. Between a cruiser a destroyer, the HMS dreadnought (exam question) created in 1906 and it comes after decades of british naval construction (best in the world) and british naval strategy. Not overnight; constant need to upgrade the Navy. 

      British id their empire with their Navy. Constantly looking to upgrade their massive Navy infrastrucutre.
      The new ingredient is the industrial revolution, which has introduced all sorts of new naval technology. 
      At the beginning of the century, old woodden ships and sails
      By the end of the 19th century you were dead in those, Almost every mil vessel had a metal hull with big cannons.

      The learning curve is very steep; British sought to build a 'superweapon'

      Dreadnaught totally revolutionises tactical deployment. Has 4 big turbine engines, the fastest ship in the world. All weather vehicle, in all waters in the world at any time in the world. Can break thru ice tho it usually doesn't. 12 inches of steel armour. When it rolls off a dry dock, they actually shoot cannons against it and it just bounces off. Almost impenetrable to every other ship in the world.

      It has 5 rotating turrets. Gun emplacements, in the old days you would have to turn your vessel, which is no longer an issue. Fired 1 pound shells that can be fired 10k yards. For the first time in Hst you will not see the ship shooting upon you (totally changes shit up).

      When it rolls out of dry dock, it renders two thirds of the world's navies obsolete. Everyone wants one themselves. It goes from being a single ship to a whole class shortly. 
      
      --> A naval race begins 1906-1914. All the powers that can desperately want to build one. 

      Immediately, everyone has to step up each other's games. 
      This fucks with people, starts a naval scare.
      The reality of the race is separate; the scare is that we are convinced we are building many many more than we actually are. This fuels the fires of resentment, hostility much more than the actual race.

      The culprit behind this? Education. One of the 19th century phenoms is univ. education, most people squander their literacy. Tabloids, propaganda. Literally crap, propagate misinformation. Vast majority start to believe the fairy tales of how many are being built

      In 1908 after a German navy law, 500 thousand people descend on UK parliament chanting 'we want 8 and we wont wait'.
      Dudes like William Le Queux writes fantastical stories about german spies

      Enormous ingredient on the road to war. 


German Naval Laws
  1900
    pre-dreadnaught
    old place, new country - feels pressure for imp. glory more than most
    Places accelerated naval construction; FR and UK have had longstanding avies
    Germans have to create one from scratch

  1908
    with dreadnaught in mind
    Particularly dramatic

Premised on the Kaiser Willhem II (1888-1918)
      Do not think of him like Adolf; a lot of what he thinks might resonate, but totally different backgrounds.
      Sees germany as a great power and wants it to be a greater power.
      Very agressive world view; sees that DE should expand upon its power
	'Germany wants its place in the sun', take on British 'sun never sets in the empire'

      Does not necessarily want Britain's place; the French on the other hand...
      Has an idea of the world,
      --> weltpolitik
	world politic, germany wants power, conflict is inherent
	fundamental threat to the balance of power.


  German democracy ultimately controlled by land owning elites, friends of the King, has much more power on parliament (Bundestag) than the British King.
  Kaiser dictates this militaristic approach/economy. He makes it mandatory that Naval strategy become requisite in all university courses. A disciple of Mahan, naval strategist who mantains that empires are born of navies (predicts carriers), whose book becomes mandatory reading in German universities. 
  His embrace of the Navy is inherently against the balance of power. Generally not thinking about the consequences of his politics.

  The first thing he does when he comes into power is to dismiss Otto Von Bismarck.
    Bismarck: one of the most famous generals in history, renowned as a realist in foreign policy. Spearheaded German unification, and after that brought Germany into the balance of power. Tho very militaristic and conservative, he maintained balance of power thru very artful diplomacy. He understands that war is shitty, and tried to keep Germany out of wars. When he dismissed, the Kaiser is being really arrogant.


  Kaiser's first cousins:
  first born grandson of queen victoria
    Czar Nicholas II (1894-1917)
    king Edward VII (1901-1910)
    king George V (1910-1936)

    Why would the germans go to war with the UK? They're so similar.


Alliances:
  The last ingredient needed for war
  Most spectacular, most confusing

  Congress of Vienna
    keep nationl'sm under wraps
    make sure not one power dominates the continent
    = balance of power.
      Can only work while everyone is relatively equitable


  Once alliances start things become more rigid, almost impossible to maintian a balance. 

  As nationalism becomes more unmanageable, peeps have to take action and provoke reactions from outside your empire, and so you need an alliance. Once that starts other people will want to one-up you.

  Alliance system:
    Starts with the 'dual alliance' 1879. 
    Followed by the triple alliance 1881
      one alliance system
      Germany + Aus-Hun and then Italy.

      Central powers allied in a permanent alliance
      This alliance (IT is not a great power, tho geographically important)
	Small footnote: Italy joins with one proviso, it will go to war but only if one of those two is attacked. If it does the attacking, it can stay neutral.
      Not every alliance is the same. Binding documents that outline exactly what you have to do.

      the Alliance powers.
      As we get closer to war they wil lreach out and try to get the ottomans in with them - they all are concerned with Russia.

    Profound consequences for breaking a treaty
      You are now alone, no one will trust you anymore. 

    Scramble for alliances begins.

    Reinsurance treaty, 1890
      Kaiser makes a big decision. Decides to end the reinsurance treaty, allows it to lapse. Created by Bismarck to assure Russia, that they would not fuck with them. In part a response to the Balkans war.

      Message is kind of obvious.
      Wilhelm expected/wanted a war. Catch is that he expected one with France and Russia, but not with England.
      Concept of war mostly like a game of risk.

      What do you do if you're Russia?

    Can't sign with the Turks... hey the French.

    Franco-Russian Entente 1894. 
      Desperate, and form a desperate alliance across this central european juggernaught. 
      Fought against each other with Napoleon and Crimea.
      Fundamentally a reaction to the Alliance.


    What about Britain?
      Wants splendid isolation. Does not see *any* alliance as being productive.
      Wants to stay out of european affairs. 
      They know full well that the moment they enter an alliance system it will fuck things up. 
      German structure is way more powerful; good news tho, we like each other! You would assume they would favour that alliance.
      However they now are a major threat to the british and their imperial security. Courtesy of the naval scare, start to take a much dimmer view of their german cousins than they should have.

      Now the brits look to their two worst enemies as potential alliance partners. British rethink their concept of empire.

      Out of all of our imperial positions which ones are the most threatened, and work back from that position. Let's rejig the empire to enable us to fight a war in Europe; enable defacto independence for Canada, Australia. 

      In Asia, only major threat are the Japanese; if they become our friends we can pull mil resources from the area. Britain enters the system indirectly.

      Anglo-Japanese Naval accord in 1902
	Signed every 10 years, with Russia in mind.
	in 1912, the threat is Germany.
	in 1922 it changes again.

	the moment the british line up against Russia, they freak out.

	For Japan it's enourmously symbolic. Invited to the big kids table, there are people weeping in the streets of Tokyo. Worlds preminent power asks them to join this large family of powers.

	However, what if they are not so restrained?
	Once britain joins the game things change.

      Anglo-French Entente 1904
      Anglo-Russian Entent 1907
	Diff kinds of relationships - 'entent' -> understandings
	Not formally binding to the UK.

	Unfortunately, the Germans interpret these as alliances and tension in Europe shoots up.



#Sept30

Old concept that this was all caused from the aggressive fp of germany; eh onot quite
"new spin", now most historians argue that there's a twist:
  Britain bears a small amount of responsibility
  'how much responsibility does Britain bear?'

  Is this accidental that UK's policy is ambiguous or is there a more sinister design behind it?

  Britain's Entente's

  UK make a point of it being an entent rather than an alliance, with the presumption that they can maintain a free hand
  
  --> Arguments
    Some people think they did it this way cos they didn't know how to maintain the balance of power; trying to keep a free hand.
    
    UK entered into these ententes with the express purpose to send vague messages to all alliance members; allowing the UK to sit on the fence and join whichever side it wanted to


Mixed signals were sent.

The germans become more and more convinced that the british and their would-be allies are trying to encircle Germany, which in turn incentivizes them to gain more power

Dreadnaught built between French entente and Russian entente and the german naval law is after.

The Germans begin to perceive UK FP as encirclement whether it's true or not



Moar crises post 1894 all of these come back to the alliance system:

  Sino-Jap war 1894-1895
    China is huge but absolutely in decline
    Penetrated by every single colonial power
    Nobody 'owns' china, but they've penetrated the chinese coast and created city states. Most big cities are international cities or dominated by one or two foreigners.
    Jap is in ascendancy and they want ch resources.

    The rest of the world looks at Japan, and the UK are like welll why not.
    Other powers start to get nervours; Russia esp.

  Egypt 1898
    Britain and France nearly go to war yet again
    Don't actually fight.

  US-Spanish 1898-1900
    Disruption of global power; accidentally become an empire overnight
    Arguments over whether they intended to

    Spain is on its knees, ostensibly over Cuba
    US decides to posture as the defender of the Cubans.
    Chase them across the ocean, quick war

    Rise of the US as an actual power; Britain starts to look towards the US, anticipating they might have to call upon them. (trading away canadian claims to alaska)
  
  Boxer Rebellion 1900
    Pissed off chinese nationalists
    Foreign troops from all over the world show up and put them down
    In Beijing it's literally an international team.
  
  Boer war 1899-1901
    S.African boers decide to rise up against the british commonwealth
    German clandestinely provides supplies (start to help peeps that piss the brits off)

  Russo-Jap 1904-1905
    How the alliance system works:
    Britain has signed a treaty in 1902 with Japan, the first entering into the alliance system.

    Reason for this is geography: when there is a void other peeps tend to collide, making jp and ru enemies.

    Railways across russia to control empire, and cut across to the pacific into the sea of Japan, way close to ch territory, Machuria.

    As China decays, the Japs gain territory in Manchuria and begin building railways. They literally collide, become immediate rivals.

    Russia is also a pacific power, which would annoy you if you're Japanese. They move their fleet to Port Arthur, to posture against the Japs.

    Russians profoundly arrogant, thinking that their massive armies are sufficient. Japan sees this as an opportunity to rise in the world by taking on Russia. Due to its massive size, the Russians take a while to move their troops, and the Japanese sneak attack and sink their entire fleet at Port Arthur.

    Russians are fucked. Their Baltic fleet is fucking crazy far away, and they have to go thru all these British owned straits.

    They could ask or pay fees, but the Brits got that treaty. Puts the British in an awkward spot. 

    Several months into the war they show up into Asia Pacific and come across the japanese sea. The Japanese are placed in the Tsushima Strait separating Korea and Japanese. The Japanese ambush the fleet and destroy it yet again. 

    Russians fight to a draw on the land war, ceases to be a pacific power and is totally exhausted by this war. 
    Japanese defeats a european power, rises to the global stage.

    The land war on the other hand is a perfect demonstration of the horros of ww1 to come; same technology, same kind of horrors - but no one is really paying attention


    The British are unsettled by this. The balance of power is shifted, leaving only Japan and the British in the area. They are unchecked and can effectively do whatever they want.

  Morocco 1906-06, 1911
    2 separate crisis almost identical.
    Under french rule; parts of morocco want to be independent
    The Sharif of Fez turns to other imperial powers, in this case Germany who wants to fuck shit up and send a large fleet.

    The French ask the Brits for help and leave them in a quandary.
      How do they show the French they are serious and the Germans that they aren't?
      They send a fleet and all three fleets just sit there and chill until they negotiate it out.

      A mixed message; from a fr perspective it's great! for the germans, well they showed up but at the same time they didn't fight. Eh!

  Balkan wars 1911-1913
    Involves russia, austria and the turks.
    'young turk' Revolution in 1908 in Ottoman empire that replaces the sultan with mil officers; several republics like Bulgaria break away.
    Seeing them as weak, everyone begins to attack the Turks and starts using this 

    Bulgaria, Serbia, Greece vs Ottoman

    Final question goes down to Bosnia-Herzegovina:
      Austria has had enough, and will not back down to Serbia's demands. Alliance system kicks in like dominoes and the question becomes:
      What will britain do?


#oct5

thinking of battles in 19th century terms without thiking about 20thcentury technology

causes of war comes to roost in one particular placein 1914, not to say that this war would not have ocurred some place else - war is inevitble by this point. No surprise here, just where and when?

Sarajevo, capital of Bosnia Herzegovina
Heavily contested by all powers directly and indirectly

Blame on everyone:
  Serbs
    in addition to being troublesome in the empire
    use their nationalism not to just gain autonomy but also claiming other parts as part of a greater serbia
    due to this jockeying it gains a kind of autonomy
    very militant serbs subscribing to terrorist orgs like the 'Black Hand'
    they use Sarajevo as their claim of a greater Serbia
    --> Austrians hoever also want Sarajevo as a symbol of their cohesion

  Archduke Franz Ferdinand travels to Sarajevo; of all of the officials in the Aus empire, he was prolly most sympathetic. Sent on a goodwill tour, but unappreciative of how controlled Sarajevo was by Serbians and how deep the animosity against him went.
    Not that he never thought they would try to kill him, he makes all sorts of unfortunate decisions
    Sec detail is much smaller than it should be - trying to signal that he is unafraid
    Disregards their advice and publishes most of the details of when or where he's going to appear. Wanted everybody to show up
    Decides to show up in an open vehicle, a convertible
    on the day he's assassinated, a bomb goes off in his hotel and instead of getting the fuck out, he shows himself out and continues on his path

    As he's rounding in traffic, out of the shadows an assassin named Pricipe and kills both him as his wife as the bullet ricochets.
      Perfect harbinger of doom, [mythical creature that gives you an advance warning].
      google archduke assassination

    Is a perfect catalyst of what is to come, a causus belli

  Austria
  -------
    uses this an excuse to go to war
    
    approaches in 2 styles
      1) list of ultimatums to the serbian gov't, which are progressively more difficult to meet - very hard for them to meet. Rig it so they cant really meet all of their demands
      2) Smart to realize that a war just between them and serbia is impossible, they go see their friends in Berlin

      Within a week of the assassination, they ask the germans for support as per their 1878 alliance.

  Germany
  -------
    If you have a sober friend who is thinking seriously, he would tell you not to get into a fight; germany is itching for a fight
    --> Instead of advising them to cool off, they give them a 'blank cheque' on July 5, 1914 saying that they will sponsor and support Austria in any circumstances. Kaiser doesn't even consult parliament.

    Austrians now much more confident over the prospects of war.

Mobilisation
  today when nations mobilize they press a button and you're good to go
  in 1914, it is used as a defacto decl of war; it requires a lot of infrastructure
  it signals to everyone else what your intentions are
  predicated on how sophisticated your mil and economy are
  In the most sophisticated places, it can be 'partial', respinding in kind to the nature of your threat. Send some of its army, some of its navy, the economy functions normally. You can do it if you have a standing army.

  up until this point, your pro army was more than suitable for all of these fights

  with all these prospects, you need to go into a full mobilistion
  if yr russia you have a 1mil standing army, the biggest one
    this means you need all the food, the bullets, the hay, the etc
    if you intent to go to war you're going to need to mobilize five million men and get all the extra food, bullets, etc
    most are illiterate, so you even have to tell your peasants that war is going on

    when germany goes from partial to full mobi, it takes about 3-5 weeks as most of the people are literate and partially trained
    if you're russia, it can take months to mobilize everyone

  Much more than some little trivial issue, how functional is your economy, and competent your gov't is

  if yr the french and see the DE mobilize part of their army, eh they're not necessarily goign to attack you. If they mobilize 3 million people, you get concerned and mobilize as well. important in diplmacy

  Russians
  --------

    Now in 1914, fearing russian reputation is in the line
    the russkis turn around and give the Aus a list of ultimatums to rescind their ultimatums

    However htey don't have the ability to partially mobilize, so they have no choice but to fully mobilize. Comes with a tragic bend.
    Nicky's diary is all "took a warm bath in the ocea" when he mobilizes 5 million dudes.

    With Russia fully mobilizing, Germany and Aus have no choice but to fully mobilize as well.

    France mobilizes as well.


    When you fully mobilize, your retool your economy towards war, and their food supply is weakened.


--> Big question is: what is the UK going to do?
  Germans convinced that Britain has no cause to fight almost right to the end
  Why would they want to fight us over? We are innately allies. 
    Both hate fr and ru
    econ compatible
    similar lang and culture

  Germans want a war, and they're cool with doing it with FR and RU at the same time.


  British
  ------

    Here is where their culpability comes in.
    What is in it for the Brits to send mixed signals until August 1914?
      They're down with having everyone else fuck up while they stay out

    German planned for this war a decade before this war occurs
      ---> planned this mobilisation with the Schlieffen Plan of 1905
      German objective to avoid fighting in two fronts, ideally fight one at one time
      Based on everything within the country, the Germans look at Russia and go, you will mobilise the slowest. Takes weeks to cross the country, give them at least 2 months to mobilize their standing army. You strike France first.

      Focus armies on the western front, leaving only a basic army in the east. Unlikely to be attacked as it lacks offensive capabilities.

      Being German they are ruthlessly efficient and think of all sorts of eventualities. The FR expect them to attack at Alsace and Lorraine.
      Therefor they decide to attack them from Belgium, which is also much loser to Paris. The Schlieffen plan expects them to sweep up from behind.

      ---> One problem: it's guaranteed by treaty to be neutral.
      Have not accounted for the diplomatic fallout
	
      Principle of neutrality is at stake, but more importantly if they win they totally fuck up the balance of power. 

      The British position was totally underestimated, and this is where it begins to change.

    The Germans understand it will incense the Brits when they invade Belgium. Very last moment, Belgium is issued an ultimatum to attack the French.
    British issue a counter ultimatum, which the Germans are OK with.
      The British don't have the capacity to fight, don't really want to fight over FRaaaance and Beeeelgium, it will be awkward over, is ok.

      Brilliance and tragedy of it: when the Brits go to war, the Empire goes to war. Brit army isn't very big, but their empire is. France's empire goes to war. South east asia goes to war.

      By the end of August 1914 there are fifteen million men from all over the world.
  


#oct7

four short ans out of ten terms
overhead chalk board terms

history/akhook
##############

ww1/ww2 one war separated by a twenty year peace

how much our world is a product of ww1
obv. diplomacy's gonna change

generational effect - twenty years later many leaders had been involved
women's lib, increased social and econ freedom

technology dramatically changes
corporations fight the war - ford, gm, mitsubishi

appreciate the physicality of the war, the terrible tragedy of this
a generation of men with very few ideological differences

basic physical stuff:
  ultimately a war of attrition
  no one is used to this kind of warfare
  the front lines barely change over 4 years

  other front lines:
    the alps
    eastern front, quite fluid
    balkan front

    and war at sea

  western front:
    only about 200km long.
    cos its flat and full of rivers, the shelling turned the whole thing in to a mudfield
    rampant disease - malaria in turkish front, typhoid, dysentery, The Flu

    The Spanish Flu was a product of world war I, kills 60 mil people

In 1914, as the men march off expecting to come on home by december, germans load a gun named 'Big Bertha' which required 36 horses and 200 men to mobilize weighing 33 tons, shooting 2000 shells in one round for a min range of 10 miles. It shelles Paris from 60km away. 19th century war in terms of tactics and strategy.

By eo1914 over 2 million refugees in Belgium. 5k belgiums killed under the pretext of being guerrillas. Cdn soldiers responding to a rumour that germans are crucifying captured soldiers, begin to crucify german soldiers.

Ridiculousness of war: at Verdun, within 72hrs about 80,000 dead on both sides. In the Somme in 1915 there are 250,000 men died over 2weeks. 


Gallipolli 1915-1916

Still 12 million unexploded shells in western front
Since 1991, 66 farmers have died in Belgium as their mchinery hits shells
Tons of campers and lumberjacks, forensic historians.

Since eoww2 700 bomb specialists died trying to disarm ww1 bombs.
Rifles have totally changed, albeit initially a lot sucked for rain and mud.

last months of 1914 were inundanted with heavy rain fall, leading to gun jams. You had machine guns, which was new, hand grenades, mines.

Mustard gas! Formerly known as chlorine gas, devised for the war, most feared thing of all in the war - it would hover in trenches.

Aeroplanes make their appearance in ww1, submarines, tanks, barbed wire. most gfx example of all - xmas 1914 along the western front spontaneously a german baker on the german lines started singing silent night and the brits started to sing and a couple of them went into no man's land and they started to exchange pictures, they brought out food rations and had xmas dinner together in many places of the western front. 

#oct19

how encompassing change is

allied vs central powers

Top ally powers
  Rus, FR, UK, Serbia (not exhaustive)
  by the end of the war 17 nations

Central powers
  DE, Aus-Hun, Ottoman/Turkey

The war has an incredible momentum and dynamic to it that only wars can have. Tend to think of it as a bunch of treaties - think of it as chickens and the price of wheat.

The longer that the war goes it becomes an entirely different enterprise than anyone dreamed of. Everyone went off convinced they would be back in December. In a real tangible sense the war will have a much more adverse affects on the economy and moral of the nation states

what they intented, their objectives, all of these almost immediately leave and become fundamentally different in a year. By 1915 most of the identifiable objectives of the war have already disappeared for these nation states, tho they would not admit most of the empires after 1915 subscribed to one idea: survive. Get the hell out of war, tho they more they now had to justify it in territorial claims. 

All of these nations susbcribed to grand ideas in 1914. Don't be abstract like a risk game; think about the price paid for war - human sense, economic sense.
  In 1914 German soldiers were extremely well fed. The struggle becomes to maintain that feeding for 4 years of war (up from 6 months). Not only do we have young men in fields who are no longer there to work - the workforce is very diminished. Longer the war goes the greater the pressure on the DE public.
  By early 1916 there is mass starvation in cities and 1917 there are legendary examples of farmers who would bring their donkeys and horses who would get killed and eaten immediately. Nobody had planned for this.

  Today as we speak there are young peopel dying in our name. We've managed to make war so detached today. Here when we talk about total war - we're talking about rape, regular starving to death.

  These kind of impulse in 1914 changed dramatically and are directly related to the length of the war - the longer you go the more you have to change your ultimate goals into surviving.


  None of these nations are terribly ideological or convictions that differentiate them - they just want more territoriy or different parts of it.

  Example: nations change sides indiscriminately.


  in 1914 Italy is allied in the tripple alliance, but it had a proviso that allowed it to skip out if their allies do the attacking. It stays neutral in the conflict. Allies are delighted when they decide not go to war, and decide to woe them over 6 or 7 months to draw them on their side - and they take the bait.
  In 1915 in a secret treaty, in exchange for austrian territory they go off to war. 

  Bulgaria 1915 - easily joined either side of the war, fought in a series of balkan wars before against the turks and the serbians. They join the central pwoers.

  Rumania 1916 could've joined either side as well but side with the allies.

  Even unimportant countries like Greece in 1917, Siam (modern day Thailand), which is SE Asia. Peru also goes to war. They go to war not because it impenges on them but because they see it to their advantage. They see that after a total war, there will be a total peace they will want to sit at a table and negotiate.

Most important along these lines, are Japan and US.
  In 1902 JP signed a treaty with the Brits and in 1914 is technically allied with the Allied powers; do not send soldiers to fight, but focus on taking german colonies in Asian Pacific. Lose like 130 men in ww1. (Does not bode well for the future, does not pay the same price as the others)

  The US is far more important; joins in April 1917.
  ppl think they know the US, but it's immensely complicated. 'the most complicated country in the world'. We subscribe to childish mythologies about the US, just a series of mythologies sold to the uneducated.

  'America has gone to war for oil', 'America has always supported israel'
  They do not go to war for any one particular reason. Hideously complicated.

  Offering us a way to look at the US now and today. 
    Not a super power at all. Its navy is 8th largest in the world.
    It has unchecked power, no natural enemies and is a land of milk and honey. Filled with resources, educated people and industrial infrastructure.
    
    At no point have many Americans talked about the domination of the world; it is an "anti imperial power" by design. Ultimate revolutionary state and its designs on the world have been far less evident; they have a great deal of cultural power and economic power. 

    Where this all begins is 1914. The road for its rise as a superpower is not clear or even; what is obvious in 1914 is that it has a tremendous potential to become a world power.


    Most protagonists in the war look to the US for some indication of what it will do in the war. Longer the war goes the more they have to pay attention to who is not participating.

    In 1914 it proclaims its neutrality and it takes it very very seriously. It's just challenged almost from the start, but legally and militarily it is neutral - the populus believes strongly in its neutrality. 
    
    It's handy if you think about it as a nation of immigrants, in terms of its legal system which is tolerant and as a result the American president at the time would need to think actively about the composition of its nation - which is they they get so confusing. You have a number of constituencies you have to pay attention to.

  Unlike Germany or UK or JP the US (and CA) have to think differently as a condition of their existence, as war breaks out there is no domestic consensus on which way to go.

Major groups in the United States
  Peeps who favour neutrality cos they don't like ANYONE involved, no geographical interests or money to be made. 

  What americans like is the notion that they are superior, a 'noble experiment' in the world order. The Mechanics of how they want people to aspire to their values is fairly passive.

  A good proportion are either apathetic or want to stay out.


  --> At the same time you have large groups with ethnic or linguistic affiliation with one side or the other - lots of british descendents. US East Coast a very pronounced British legacy. Anyone who has any sort of influence is very sympathetic to the Allies. Doesn't hurt that the Germans rape their way through Belgium in 1915.

  They sare the same kind of religion, similar kinds of culture. The cultural and political affiliation between the two starts to emerge and identify the Allies as protectors of Civilization.

  --> In MN, Wi, Il, PN it's filled with Germans and Poles
  tens of thousands of recent immigrants go back to fight for their empire.

  Throughout the US, the diversity of the population meant you had several opinions about the war. 

  --> Also sharply divided in terms of business; the US isn't one big biz entity, it has multiple conflicting biz impulses at one point in time, there isn't one dominant industry.
    Some elements favoured going into war, but simultaneously a lot of other producers didn't want to go cos they would be hurt. once again you see this. 
    
    Generally prefer the Allied cause -> tned to be painfully torn between the two.


Woodrow Wilson 1913-1921
  prolly most important and influential president evar
  In jan 1913 when he becomes president, only pres to hold a phd (in politics) and thinks he understands things. Son of an evagenlical presbyterian minister, strong ideas of missionaries - likes of America as leading by example. 
  
  Thinks that both sides are entirely culpable for the war.

  Favours a strict neutrality - neutral in act and thought and did not want to divide his domestic consensus. Many more fish to fry than the War - labour, taxation, reform of the economy. 'In America all politics are local'.

  Wilson says, it's my domestic consensus I gotta think of.
  He understands this multiplicity of viewpoints but by the nature of the war being neutral is harder and harder - as it drags on the participants all want US' help.

  When it proclaims its neutrality, it can now engage in trade with either side. You can become the funder of war - neutrality has a certain economic benefit. 

  It gets tricky: they have to get their cues from what is going on the field and what is going on is injurious to American neutrality.


---> In 1914 a 'naval blockade' immediately goes into affect and they choke the german coastline. The blockade on shipping involvs the US - and US vessels are now subject to a blockade. Under internation law it's illegal against a neutral.
  If it's a neutral vessel it has a right to go thru the blockade. US Neutrality faces its own real test. Brits start to stop, seize and detain US vessels as they carry stuff for the Germans - this is effectively an act of war, and they could totalyl declare war
    but they don't.

  Wilson and his administration decide it's not worth it, by trading more with Britain. From the beginning, trade with the Germans dries up and trade with the allies goes up dramatically.

  Longer the war goes the more injurious this is on the Germans - they do not have colonies while the Brits and the FR do. Not only they got extra posessions AND they get to trade with the US.

  Germany does not have infinite resources, and this stagnation will ultimately bring them down. The US should have/could have gone into war in 1914 - but they had no interest in fighting Britain.

Germans are smart and figured this would happen. 
  Start building submaries (uboats) to evade naval blockades. Have an insidious culture behind them - in 1914 part of the fascination with submarines was that peeps made sexual references to them, they stimulated different thought processes. 
  Very romantic thoughts of ships - nothing noble and romantic about submarines. Terrifying stuff, they 'penetrate' your forces.

  No real firm laws for uboats at sea yet, recent phenomena. 

  Still cutting edge. Already in 1914 were this 'insiduous weapon', but they were required by law to surface before they shot at you. Dive at 30 meters tops. German solution against blockade is to kill German shipping.

  They go after 'flagged shipping' and sink British or Cdn flags. If it's a passenger liner, they won't sink it. Only shipping identifiable could be attacked. Uboats quickly find out that a lot of ships coming over are Americans, and the British start to hide war materials on American ships and civilian carriers. 
    Effectively baiting the Germans into attacking American ships.

    Both then and in ww2 they were referred to as a wolf pack and attack the slowest ship - oil or troop carriers.

  One particular episode galvanizes American popular opinion
  May 1915 - the Lusitania
    Outbound from nyc to britain via ireland.
    Hundreds of Americans vacationing.

    A uboat picks up the ship as it's passing by the Irish coast, it's misidentified as a tropp carrier, it rises up and shoots a warning shot. Unfortunately for them it just fucking explodes and instead of taking 2 hours to sink it goes down in 28 minutes. This is suspicious - people think it was full of munitions and against int'l law. 

    Unlike the mythology that follows - they do NOT go to war. Pres and public is furious, demands restitution and inquiries and a few demand going to war - but it's not overwhelming.

    Wilson issues a speech that says "it's too proud to fight". Germans will profusely apologize, ads in newspaper, formal apology and pays restitutions to family members.

    Sours public opinion but they do not go to war.
    
    Brits regularly employed tricks like this, breaking all sorts of laws.

Do not refer to US "isolationism" as an absolute.
  Should always be in quotes. Has never been 'isolationist', damning that it's used so regularly. 
  What America does is very sober - looks at the reality of ww1, and asks why the fuck would we want to get involved? Nothing to be gained.

  Regaled with a long list of endlessly violent battles.

  The Somme
    250k men die in 72 hours in one place.
  
  Ypres, Verdun, Passchendale, Vimy Ridge, Gallipoli
    Horrible loss of life. Absolute chaos, an indiscriminate sacrifice.

  No shit they were not enthusiastic. The reality is they have no vested interest in the war. They make a lot of money, sure, but war always makes a lot of money for somebody. 

  America has no particular war aims. The war instead comes to America, and is a very complicated process from the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915 and 1917.

If you want to influence America what do you do?
  Wine and dine all the newspaper peeps.

  The result was a terribly jaundiced press - most daillies would broadcast accounts of the war with a very allied slant. Steeped in british influence.

  American public starts to see its role as maybe ending the war. A missionary zeal if you like, save humanity. 

  Trigger events:
    'unrestricted submarine warfare'

    After the Lusitania they promise to restrict their warfare
      restrict to known identifiable targets carrying non civilians and mil hardware
      do this promising to show a degree of civility
	
	big problem:
	  for the germans this a difficult proposition
	  as trade becomes lopsided they start to lose the war
	  by 1917 they are faced with the extinction of the war effort
	  if they don't sink stuff they will lose the war by sheer economics.

	Flip side is that if we go after the ships we will bring US against us and lose the war.
      --> A big caveat
	they understand they're damned if they do and damned if they don't
	War is going differently in the east than in the west
	The eastern front is quite fluid in german favour.

	We need to remember how hsitory works.
	The US and its entry is inextricably linked to a revolution in russia.

The war goes SO BAD for russia that many of their men they do not have enough munitions or guns or boots or food. In many cases Germans were confronted with Russians throwing rocks and snow balls. The desperation of Russia's war effort is a huge factor
  
  The Germans see this and they decide by the spring of 1917 - chances are that they can win the war in the east before the full weight of American entry into the war can be made evident, freeing up 2.5 million battle hardened Germans can be free'd up for the western front.
  
    Full American mobilization would take about 6-12 months, not terribly good soldiers. Called 'dough boys' cos the brits thought they were fat and stupid.

    Now we have a protagonist with an endless supply of dudes and tremendous industrial weight. If they can win in Russia in time, and knock the French out before they can get into the field they'll be cool.

    In theory this would work great.

    In March of 1917 they decide to resume 'unrestricted submarine warfare' and sink all ships at sea, knowing full well that this would invoke America's wrath and bring it into the war. 
    ---> If they don't do this they will lose the war in the long run.

Zimmerman telegram of 1917
  communique between german foreign minister and his ambassadors in Washington and Mexico city. Fantastical message that outlines a program for Mexico and Japan.
  an offer that he tells his envoys to make to the Mexicans - in exchange for Mexico to attack the US, the Germans will ensure that Mexico receives all of southern states it lost in the 19th century.
    
   Offer the japs the same thing - offer the pacific to the Japanese.

    Even if these had made it to the Mexicans or the Japs, it was totally laughable. 

    Interesting in that it was sent by protected cables. When war breaks out the telegram lines are tapped or cut; in this case the Germans send it over the American lines. 

    Unfortunately for them, the british are listening to the American cables, knowing full well it too is an act of war. They want to tell the Americans but they can't outright reveal the source.

    Western Union was used to send messages to Mexico and stage a break in at that office and make it look like some petty thug had broken in and stolen stuff. 


Zimmerman telegram was annoying but the real reason they got involved was the unrestricted submarine warfare. On April 2nd, Wilson asks for a declaration of war from Congress.

Wilson immediately declares itself as not an Ally but as an 'Associate', we have our own reasons for being in this war, we have different aims.

  The US enters the war on diff grounds.
  America begins to prepare for the war; first combat soldiers hit it at the eosummer1917.

  immediately they make their war objectives clear:
    --> Jan 1914 where Wilson outlines his 'peace without victory'
    fighting for peace, no victory - don't care how it ends exactly.
    Allies have really hard times with how they fight - they don't understand this.

    With millions of dead and a shattered economy, they want *something*, they *need* to bring something home. They knew it was ridiculous but they needed to have a victory, I have to be able to justify why a generation of men are dead, they knew it was dubious but it was the momentum of war.

    war as a suckmother

    Do NOT underestimate the US - a very different power then
    Follows up with a very different platform
      Wilson is full of hypocrisy
      speaks of lofty ideas and turns around does something completely against it in Mexico

      ---> Wilson's Fourteen Points outline the grand US strategies for entering the war
      - Annexations
	  No peeps should lose territory
      - Reparations indeminities
	  Nobody should have to pay for the war
      - Free Trade
      - Colonies and territories
      - Autonomy
	  'Pursue self determination' which nobody in europe agrees with
	  top wilsonian principle, antithetical to Empire
	  Terribly revolutionary with these principles

      - League of Nations
	  an international forum for working out their disputes?

    Far less succesful in executing this, but still.
    Terrible hypocrite, but the principles are very important for our world order. 'The nucleus of the world order in which we live with'.

    Nobody takes this 14 points too well
    
      Allies don't like cos it's the opposite of what they want to do.
	Have little choice
      The Germans also don't like it, stupidly, 
	if they were not dominated by the notion of a victorious peace they should've realized that they could've gone into negotiations immediately ithout an absolute and crushing defeat
	in 1918 they don't agree to the 14 points cos they still think they can win the war, HUGE MISTAKE


Meanwhile trouble is abrewin in Russia
  Enourmously complicated enterprise

  Marxism/Communism
    3 main intellectual reasons why its so revolutionary

    - Idea is nothing new, goes back to the ancient greeks, taken a myriad affect across history
      In the 19th century in the center of the industrial revolution, the inequities of human dev is so great that dudes likr Marx come along and articulate it in terms of history
      A unique perspective on the world
	Writes famous books like Das Kapital, the Manifesto, comes up with a framework that revolves on 3 major tenents on the world and history

	1 - Communism is godless, religion is the opiate of the masses
	    Religion is a drug to keep you stupid
	    The elites that control gov't and society want you believe in the faith, which they control

	    Why communism as an entity is so dangerous for nation states
	      so profoundly religious societies
	      Notion of an atheistic society is absolute heresy
	
	2 - Marx argues that the state should govern it the means of production, all of the infrastructure and resources and human capital
	    State will work towards equity

	    Writing in the midst of the ind. rev. and his logic was that sooner or later it was in-evi-ta-ble that there would be a revolution

	    Rest of the world is very capitalistic
	      Absolutely antithetical to US, UK

	3 - Most importantly it is revolutionary in every sense of the word
	    Purports to be international and historical
	    
	    He said, 'historical dialetic', anywhere in society in any time you will always have 1 commonality that drives revolution
	    
	    Class.

	    The proletarian revolution. At any point in time there will always be a working and a wealthy class; if you extrapolate the capitalist system, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer and eventually they will snap.

	    Revolutions: international and inevitable.

	    Western leaders seeing this going into action and go, oops.
	      Lots of pissed off ex soldiers.

	What he horribly got wrong:
	  (died too soon)
	  Argued that it would take place in the most advanced countries,
	  thought it was be in US, UK, DE.

	  History betrayed Karl Marx - all communist revolutions have occurred in the most desperate places.

  Russia goes off to war convinced of victory
    largest army, shittiest resources

    War is totally horrific and from the get go on retreat
      Economy fails and people leave the trenches en mass.
      Revolutions goes on all the time in Russia, but what happes now is a product of WW1.

      Millions more will die as a result of this. Up there with the Fr revolution in importance.

  Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov (LENIN)
    His nom de guerre from a river in Russia; he's actually in switzerland at the time, pay for him to go into Russia and begin his revolution quietly.

    Lenin goes back and foments revolution as the war gets worse and worse
      Begins a 2 stage revolution (linked to the war - DE is trying ti win war in the East so they can win the west)

      1 - Feb/Mar 1917
	Championed by the Mensheviks
	  moderates who want to remove the Czar but keep him as a constitutional monarch, do not want communism. Understand that they are losing the war.
	Bolsheviks - led by Lenin
	Work together in the first stage to overthrow tsar.

      2 - Oct/Nov 1917 ("bolshevik revolution")
	They are not nice. 
      
      What the question is whether Russia can hold out long enough to effect make life difficult for the Germans.

#oct21

'thematic'

1. change in russia
2. advent of the united states
  enters as an 'associate power'
  does not share war aims
  'peace without victory'
    complete opposite of allied goals
      basically complete destruction of Germany

  outlines 14 pts
  thematic points of the 14 should resonate
  all major tenants of current international order are really born here

  annexations
  reparations
  free trade
  colonies
    (of the losers)
  self determination
    not necessarily everybody all the time
  league of nations

  blueprint for the world order
  decidedly different approach than anyone else in the war


  diff positions of other powers
  UK & FR
    delighted to have them in the war
    but disappointed cos they now they have sell this bullshit
    your sons brothers husbands died for nothing, oh and the empire is over
    how the war shapes the mentality

    they HAVE to accept cos without them they are fucked in a war of attrition, but they definitely don't want to

  DE
    they still think they can win
    don't want to sue for peace too early.

    Jan 1918 both sides are reluctant to accept the peace

  This is where Russia and US are closely connected (thematically).
  Make no mistake: "associates".

Americans enter just in between Russian revolutions
  Moderate forces overthrow Tsar, enter constitution
  'nothing is ever small in russia'
  Almost immediately descend into civil war; global war, revolution and civil war almost simultaneously.

  Mensheviks
    moderates led by Kerensky
  Bolsheviks
    radicals led by Lenin
    gain power in Oct 1917

  Germans figure it'll take a year before full weight of americans is felt
  Race to kick out the Russians
    they are faring horrifically
    russian front collapses en masse
    advance more in last months of 1917 than in entire war

    Revolution accelerates with returning oldiers

  Germans thrilled; they secretely transfered him to Russia thru Finland
  Anticipate the front will collapse, and that the bolsheviks will pull out


  Unfortunate logic:
    miscalculated
    they logically concluded that the bolsheviks would leave the war
      why? communists thought that the war was b/w capitalists elites
      expansionary, the international revolution
      

      "those german soldiers that you're fighting are not your enemy; don't be angry at them, be angry at the tsar, be angry at the people who sent you there"
	Pretty darn convincing, universal argument
	makes this revolution hella problematic
	
      winnipeg general strike of 1918
	young soldiers who are totally changed
	come back and find no work

      all you have to be is lean and hungry and desperate and have no hope for the future and you're a revolutionary whether you know it or not

    Everybody assumes Russia will leave the war, turn in on itself

    But! All revolutionaries stop being revolutionaries when they come to power (oops!). All of their grand visions of exporting revolution drops dead. They keep fighting.

    Thefore, whole strategy falls apart. They don't fight long and they don't fight well. Continue to absorb bullets intended for british soldiers.

    German strategy to free 2.5 mil men fails, only manage to move 500k.
    Americans are bringing 500k men a *month*. 
    
    Oct 1917 and March 1918, these few months where they continue to fight.
    They are being slaughtered, losing huge bits of territory and if they leave now they will lose it all forever.

    If they sue for peace, they lose everything. Even Trotsky, the minister for War, who promised he'd stop it continues the war. 
    Ah, it's a war to protect the revolution!

  They leave the war early in March 1818, with treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
    Lose huge, huge chunks of territory
    No choice, Germans on the verge of absolute victory
    Better to win the civil war.
    They lose all of Poland, Balkans, huuuuge.

    Civil war from 1917 to 1922; bolsheviks control tiny minority of Russia
      The Reds
      The Whites
	loyal to the tsar who was forced to abdicate

      Tsar and family is brutally murdered, chopped into pieces so their bones could not be used as religious relics.

      When lenin comes to power, he says
	"I want you to create a special system of violence"
	"Defend the revolution without pity"
	Millions will die.

      At the beginning only control the metropolitan areas. Intellectual urban revolution.


Everything goes nuts.
  Having lost Russia, Allies panic and decide to intervene in the Russian civil war.

  Officially, their objective is to gain control of Russian ammunition depos (hilarious cos there aren't any left).
  
  Intervene cos:
    1. Bring Russia back into the war
      if someone like the tsar goes into power, they will rejoin the war
      tie up the germans
    2. if the allies come in they manage to get rid of communism altogether
      their main concern is that it will spread in the wake of ww1, with the dislocation, the suffering the punishment of ww1 will create ripe conditions for communism to spread.

      As much as you want to CrUSH the germans, you can't cos you don't want communism to flood the area. From the british perspective, crushing germany becomes problematic.

    Fail dysmally, use too few troops, it's march 1918.
    Fail in everything EXCEPT
      forever alienates the Russians, FOREVER
      from Russian perspective it's about dignity.
      Drives russians away from the West.

  German perspective
    Use this occasion to speed up their offensive. 
    Try out one last gasp
      Michael Offensive - spring 1918
	Had to be done sooner rather than later
	Ideally done in June

	Demonstrates worst technologies
	Use of tanks, aerial bombardments, flame throwers
	How insidious this offensive is
	  1 million shells in five hours

	  Bizarre and out of control
	Breaks through to almost the suburbs of Paris.

	Unfortunately, it's not even. Cdn/Aus contigent stalls offensive.

	Partly succesful but not succesful enough. Grinds to a halt as Americans flood in, Germans immediately sue for terms under the 14 points.

    
    Americans caught in a qundary
      Wanna punish Germans, but say... OK.
      Could've pushed through, crushed their lines, get a major victory

      Two big issues
	terms of peace basically the 14 points, agreed to in an Armistice
	  No victory or defeat, just an agreement.
	  agreed to submit to a conference afterwards
	    "all quiet on the western front".
	
	  Germans have never fought on their own soil.
	    Mythology forms
	      Germany is never defeated
	      A generation of Germans will accept this
	    Totally false as armies are crushed, get away only on US reluctance to launch offensives.

	  Bad news: almost as soon as the soldiers come home, the economy collapses, the militarists are expelled from power, kaiser exiled.

	  New german gov't barely able to feed people has no choice to agree to a peace it did not agree to in the armistice.

	  It's vision of a negotiated peace also collapses.

	Americans not nearly as effective negotiators as their pissed off Allies. 


#oct26


hindenburg
lundendorff

armistice nov 11 1918

paris conf dec 1918 mar 1919

german populus very sophisticated and regionilized.
moment offense stops and the economy collapses the militarists who controlled the german gov't are now in hot water - they lost the war.

They don't think in terms of loss or victory or how bad the war has gone - huge amounts of people pissed off.

Therefore, desire for a change in gov't right in nov 1918.
economy totally collapses
  New german state that emerges is very different
  2 guys who ran the show with the kaiser's blessing were
    hindenburg
    lundendorff
    ran it quite succesfully until the michael offensive failed
      you guys loss you took the shitty peace

    put in a new civilian government and maybe we can negotiate our way out of this. What emerges is a coalition gov't, which is inherently weak
    many diff political factions fighting inside the country

    people starving with returning soldiers, terribly pissed off desiring normalcy and jobs.
    K theorizes that there are many undiagnosed psych problems - ptsd, etc
    easily radicalized.

    Coalition government almost powerless from the go.

    In the span of a month, Germany goes from a large army to almost nothing as demobilization is complete.

    These men have a daunting task to negotiate

Remember: communism is a real problem in Germany and elsewhere
  conditions:
    defeat
      hunger
	starvation

  1918 failed communist revolution which gets put down - Spartacus revolution
    failed rev. in Hungary as well

    immediate, not theoretical issue.

  So key cos they agreed in the armistice to go to a prelim conference, a conference about a conf, to talk about the future peace
  did not agree to go immediately to a peace conf
    definitely did not agree to not attend their peace conf

  In effect cos of the collapse of the con, the Allies with a large standing army, (US is sitll shipping people). Millions of ery well armed allied soldiers - guess what happens. Why would we agree to that stupid armistice on those terms?

  What they thought they were getting into becomes totally different.

  One of the great mythologies in History is born
    Notion of undefeated Germans.
    It's true - not a single battle was fought on their soil. But if you want to defeat your enemy there is a historical precedent to REALLY defeat your enemy. Put its people into rough equivalents of shackles - be abundantly clear that they have been defeated. If not, these mythos emerge.

    Even the emaciated ones go home and say We weren't defeated! We didn't start this war! They never broke our line! Angry at the loss and this new bullshit new treaty.

    Hitler is amongst these. One of a generation of young men who now have a mythology. This legacy is functional and is seen again in WW2. Important to take the war to the populus.

Historians don't like "counterfactuals" - what ifs. They do not doooo that.But: Germans were totally defeated. The American entry has boatloads of fresh faced american kids. Relative superiority.

Could argue that the Americans are a bit responsible - they were unwilling to bring it to the German people. Peace without victory - why should we go further? We do not think they caused it, we did not commit our kids to fight YOUR WAR and YOUR BIDDING. 

Germany is forced to allow the Paris Peace Conf in v. diff circumstances than it agreed. Most important conference in History.
  Legendary conf of conferences. Congress of vienna does not compare.
  You can't imagine - gotta think of the time and place. Genuine feeling that it was the War To End All Wars.

  Imagine the context of the peace and the lack of historical precedent - literally recreating the world, flying by the seat of their pants.
  The traditional interpretation is that it was fundamentally flawed. Now we're start to say, wtf else would they end up with? Almost impossible to imagine the scope that they confronted.

  Logistics of the peace:
    How unmanageable
    Will give life to five separate treaties (lots of paper)
      five defeated powers
    each of these treaties and their massive issues are hacked out at the conference. 
      Supposed to be a prelim conf only. Total nightmare to deal with.

    How do you work out the representation of combatants when there were dozens? Who gets a say? How do you deal with pockets of people who now want to come and make a case under the 14 points (conceptually revolutionary)

      self determination as an American principle.

    Lots of people who did not participate start to understand that this conf is big stuff.

      Examples:
	Ho Chi Minh, a young 22 yr old student shows up arguing for the independence of Indochina due to self determination
	Young Indian nationalists, who fought and died in ww1, galvanized by some Ghandi dude start to show up under the same argument
	Groups of Jews now arguing for an ancestral ethnic empire.


    Host country is not neutral. Paris is ravaged.
    Press becomes an issue. Wake up, pages of French dead, destruction. 
    As you drive to check out the front, you get to see the truckloads of bodies. Big effect on the people who get there. Don't see the German corpses.

    French military held spontaneous strategic parades of amputees. 
    terribly biased place - after this we hold these in neutral places

    Lots of inner forums - hundreds of subcomittees.

    Biggest issues are dealt with the Big Four (Five). 
    Germany is NOT in attendence, cos of its gov't is in shambles. Goes from being brokered to being dictated. 
    Neither are the Russians thre - not terribly equitable, or the colonies or Serbia or w/e.

    US Wilson
    UK Lloyd
    FR Clemeanceau
    IT Orlando - part of conditions for joining, got to sit in.

    (sometimes)
    JP almost take out of the equation, cos only concerned with Asia Pacific.

Back in the US, small debate on whether US should go.
  Fairly sophisticated - optics are important.
  Awkward for the Americans to dictate anything. Good deal of resentment for the late entry.

  Looks very grandiose. The image that they are worried about - but the US is confusing.

  The US has NEVER determined elections exclusively on Foreign POlicy. Statistically has little to do with foreign affairs - almost always about the price of beer and pretzels.

  In 1918 Wilson spectacularly prominent internationally, almost a god like figure amongst soldiers. At least he had an idea for peace.
  Domestically... not terribly popular. 
    Domestically it's a much different country than people assume it to be.
    Regionalized, highly mobile polity.

  Wilson made a big mistake when he tied the 14 points to the fortunes of him as the Democrats. The American Congress doesn't really like this, get the war over with, get the boys home. Not interested in these fancy bullshit.

  In Oct 1918, there are congressional elections. His party loses control ofCongress in that election, as he's tied the 14 points too heavily to himself and to his party. Should have resonated as a vote on whether he should go to Paris. Rather than turn to his Republican enemies and negotiate some deal, he still goes to Paris and makes it all about himself.

  He goes for what turns out to be 3 months. Unheard of. 
  When he takes a boat, he goes to England first, when he lands in Calais he is a rockstar. Hundreds of thousands of frenchmen swooning. Becomes the embodiment of a dictator of peace.

  Clemeanceau: "Moses gave us 10 commandments and we broke them all. Wilson gave us 14 points and we shall see."

  The Allied population is enamored with Wilson, but the reality is that a lot of the leaders are profoundly resenting the American president.
  Most historians (counter factually) say that it would've been better had he sent delegates. He was too close to the peace.

  K does not like Big Man History, but in this case they'e quite important.

  Represent vastly different ideas of world
    Wilson v. educated, v. arrogant - thinks as an American, does not think of blood carnage and how they have to justify the war
    Clemeanceau - le tigre. Vicious, snarky, wiley, very smart and does not like Americans
    George - Loathsome of the french, warm to the Americans
    Orlando - Drama queen, known to cry and get up in a huff and leave.

    Personal rivalries become dramatic; their national rivalries are very important. 

  FR: CRUSH GERMANS
  UK: Balance of power! Either France becomes dominant in the continent, or the spectre of communism could flood into the void you've just created.
  IT: Italian related things.
    
14 points
  Revolutionary
  A lot of them are very problematic
  End of empire

  look at them and ask "whats the problem"
    open convenants reached openly
      uh secret treaties with Italy?

    conceptual are hardest but even specifics are hard

    'reconstitution of the polish kingdom' pt10
      take the ancient kingdom of Poland and reconstitute it and create a new state called Poland.
      Remember what they are doing. No such thing as Poland.
      Talking about Austrian and Russian territory.

      After all they were defeated, we can do what we like, right?
      Think of mechanics: villages, roads, communities
      To create an independent and viable Poland they do something ery very important. They give them access to the sea. They don't go due north, cos they already promised to create three baltic states, formerly part of the Russian Empire.
	Problem? It goes right through Prussia. The Ancestral Home of Germany. 
	The Polish Corridor is inhabited mostly by Poles. However, in unusual situations like the city of Danzig, it's a German city. Polish country side, German city. Becomes a massive question with Hitler.

    Other countries:
      Czechoslovakia - united czechs and slovaks, similar languages. Shitty if you're one of the 7 million plus germans who lived there.
	Not stupid - particularly smart in fact
	  Guarantee social rights of the Germans, we don't care. Just be apart of our confederation. 
	  However, immediately radicals prop up in the Sudetenland.

      Yugoslavia
	Wtf do you do with the Balkans?
	Keep them all in separate states, but this is not terribly economically or politically viable.
	Serbia wants a bigger Serbia, but the Croats, Slovaks etc are not interested in this. 
	Best solution is to listen to various arguments and competing claims.
	Most articulate and best connected comes with the notion of a pan slavic union - onstead of breaking them apart, which led them to a war, put them together.

	Curious idea! But it works for most of the 20th century. An experiment; they literally create Yugoslavia. Just thrown together.

	Italians do not like this; thought they would gain territory along the adriatic coast. That's what they went to war for. in 1919 and 1920, Italy will go to war with Yugoslavia. 

    Shit gets problematic. You have to tell them, "you fought for nothing".


  All of these leaders face huge problems. We can't make anybody pay for anything, we can't get more colonies - exact opposite of what they went to war for. They absolutely need *something* and here Wilson and his position starts to fade and the concepts of peace become quite different.

  Great notions are 'notions'. Easy to talk about; the reality of history is very different. American position is weakened; Wilson has a stroke while at Paris. Some argue that his wife even ran the presidency. As a result of his debilitation, two people run the show.
    Col. Edward House
    Robert Lansing - Sec. State
      
      Much more pro-british, pro-Allied than Wilson. As a result, when they are in charge the American position is quite different. By the time they make their way through, a lot of his positions get dropped off and the only thing that really sticks is the League of Nations.

      No annexations, reparations, indemnities?
	Not so, there are many. 
	Fancy phrase - not just money. You can't get money from a stone - german economy is shattered, not enough gold reserves. 

	The actual bill won't ever materialize - over the next decade until 1928 there will be a series of plans hashed by the Allies to work a repayment schedule for the German schedule. German people for the next ten years live not knowing how much they were going to pay. 
	  They went to the table thinking they would not have to pay reparations.
	  upwards of 86 billion dollars; worked in a schedule that theoretically would go up until 1986. Soldiers thought to a tie - now their GRANDKIDS have to pay for the war.
	  
	  If you're a 22 yr old survivor of the war, AND you managed to find a job (rare) and you work in a coal mine in the Saar - imagine your day
	    work 10-12 hrs, and when you come up you see the coal being lifted and go west into belgium and france instead of east into germany.

	  Easiest solution to this complicated peace? Betrayed by these civilian leaders and by the Allies.

      For the allies it's not so easy. Colonies and territories are very complciated.
      Instead they consent to an in between idea


      The Mandate system
	to implement in between colony and sovereignty - FR and UK will inherit these mandates from the Ottoman Empire. Its colonial positions now become part of the mandate system, ruled over by FR and UK for a temporary period. To help them gain independence down the road.
	Technically just like a colony, and no definitive timeline on the mandates (big problem). Iraq has no basis in history.


League of Nations
  Covenant there is one article called Article 10 which actually talks about the binding collective nature
    if you join the league of nations you become responsible for defending fellow members that are attacked. 
    French love this. Americans hate this. This is Wilson's stupidity comes in.
      Instead of making a deal and negotiating with his opposition back home (Presidents never sign treaties), he makes this a political issue not once but twice. 1919 and 1921 will try to get the US to join the League of Nations and he fails both times.
      Spiritual child of the US, the Americans never join.

    Does not include Germany or Russia. Both eventuall join DE (1926), RU (1933).
    Major participants: UK, FR, a little less IT and JP.
      UK and FR weak without the US. No stomach to enforce league of nations mandates.
      IT weakened and pissed off.
      JP srsly pissed off as many of their claims to territory in China aren't allowed, cos of secret treaties. Both IT and JP will challenge the League with their own wars.

Last note:
  the Germans when they are told to show up, confronted with one article in the traty of versailles
    Article 231
      Germany is held responsible for WW1 - the war guilt clause
      make it a major cause of German angst in 20s and 30s. By being held responsible, and the way they interpret their guilt.

#oct28

need to understand that if we are interpreting the peace, don't be ahistorical:
  a very crushing peace gives you ww2
  hitler is so pissed off about the peace, so the set pieces were the guilty bits

  but we're talking out of the equation all sorts of things that are relevant

  let's not assume that the fascists are automatically products from this failed peace.

  An idea is that it was not crushing enough.

Focus should be on the protocols, the mechanics of the peace and how they are interpreted. Consider the context - a totally collapsed german economy, spectre of communism, ethnic minorities.

Whenever we talk about grand sweeps of history remember:
  chickens, farms, roads and people.

  when you start creating countries, ultimately consider the above.
  
We are all mongrels, but self identify differently.
Poland
  ethnic animosities against it
  the mechanics become important
  different language speakers, pissed off people due to lost territory

  is it a viable state?
  can it support itself economically?

  The polish corridor managed to cut through ancestral Prussia; while logical to give it access to the sea. You can't displace all of the millions of germans who live there and you automatically create an ethnic minority.
  Danzig is an overwhelming german speaking city; so what do they do? they create a "free city", owned and occupied by no one, administrated by the League of Nations.

  Tricky business. Germans will riot if East Prussia is given away, no matter what you do you will alienate someone.

Czechoslovakia
  individual states not deemed to be economically viable on their own
  czechs and slovaks show up and say, you know what's a great solution? throw us together in a union that is stronger, and if you legitimize us we'll be  great democratic state.

  Trouble abrews: roughly equal slovak and czech populations, but they also inherited the german Sudetenland. Millions of them, and as a result they go from being either Austrian or German and instantly become Czechoslovakian. Suddenly it makes a big different; their gov't is very conscientious and bends overb ackwards to keep them under wraps with language laws, but dudes like Hitler will come along and exploit this. 
    Not just about Hitler - lots of germans don't like the polish corridor or the sudetenland.

  You also have Hungarian speakers and Poles from Galicia who are not terribly pleased with this. When the germans dissect Czechoslovakia the Hungarians and the Poles take their parts back too.

Yogoslavia
  get territory that the Italians claimed in the war that was Italian speaking, which becomes a cause for war very quickly.

Silesia, Galicia, Polish Corridor, Danzig/Gdansk

Mandates
  US does not like the idea of colonies, but they have to be admin'ed.
  idea was that they would be controlled towards their way to independence

  places like Palestine, Iraq, etc.
  They end up betraying most of the arab peoples in the areas
  
Annexations, reparations
  Despite the best intentions of the 14 points

  Alsace/Lorraine?
    Easy, goes back to the french
  
  Rhineland
    done gets occupied, cos it has most of their industrial infrastructure
    places like Frankfurt, Dorkmund

    take it away, keep it away to defang the Germans
    wasn't by design but it is in fact occupied in an open ended proposition by the french and the belgian
    occupied until 1936 when Hitler takes it back
    instant ethnic minority

  Pleaces like Malmady and the Saar
    Flems in Malmady go to Belgium

    Saar
      coal heartland of Germany
      a heavy concentration of German speakers
      allies use the pretext of a french speaking minority
	peeps hold a plebiscite to be held in.... 1935 after joint admin
	allow them to decide their own fate, be part of FR or DE?
	In the meantime they intend to flood the area with as many FR speakers as possible
	shows how the eth minority is used for claims
	ultimately joins DE

League Of Nations
  Germany doesn't join for a while, US never joins, USSR doesn't do much
  led by UK, FR, Jap, It
    UK FR exhausted, neither capable or willing to enforce things
    Jap and It are pissed off by the peace.

  lack of collective security leads to a shaky org

1920s
  Logical conclusion would be: everyone is morose and depressed?
  In general, if you have a tremendous trama in your life, you will do one of two things post trauma
    1. so depressed or angry that you will never leave your house and become bitter cynical and jaded
    2. become a party animal

  Two fundamental extremes, lots of darkness and hostility and a fantastically optimistic worldview

    Soldiers coming back from the fields both subscribe to both extremes

  The 'Roaring twenties', are generally assumed:
    a very vibrant economic expansion
      all of the guys who produced war materials have to convert their industries to civilian industries
	Ford goes from truckts to model Ts
	Refrigerators, Radios - mass consumption begins here
	jazz - universalized american culture
	art - dudes like Picasso, new concepts in art
	fashion - women start to wear shorter skirts and cut their hair

  Locarno 1925
    treaty to honour the borders
  Dawes 1925, Young 1928
    american dudes
    both of them will work out a reparations payment schedule for Germany
    working out that schedule where they'd keep paying till 86

  The International Court of Justice
    example of this spirit of good

  Mandates Comission
    mandates a step away from empire, and give life in away to indie countries

  Washington Conf
    first ever disarmament conference
  Kellogg-Briand 1928
    in effect outlaws war

#nov2

peter wronski/vronsky
pwronsky@ryerson.ca

petervronsky.com/intrelations.htm
russianbooks.org/intrelations.htm

radicalism, most radical state ideology
hitler:
  burned into our cultural dna
  murder

  historians argue these days that had they drowned hitler as youngin there would've been nazis just the same, it would have come forth regardless of a hitler; peter belongs to a diff school, claims that observing history it doesn't happen, it's people who make very bad decisions. Somebody makes a decision and someone then dies because of it. Things don't happen, they are made to happen by people.

  doted on by his mother and his older sisters. His father, typically in serial killer profiles, is absent.

  terrible student, excels only at art and gymnastics.
  firmly middle class

  father retires when he was age 11, doesn't like artists (only homosexuals do that). After 18 months he drops dead. He drops out of highschool, wanting to become an artist poet, etc, wants to go to art school in Vienna, gets told to fuck off.

  Bumming around Vienna blowing his inherited money until next year, and denies him again. Just vanishes; ends up on skid row for about 5-8 years eating out of soup kitchens and the streets, doing odd jobs. Leaves Vienna for Munich to avoid the draft. There he gets arrested and deported but gets declared unfit for service.

  Lives pretty shittily. Survives by painting postcards. When ww1 breaks ou, he's in Munich and joins army. War gives him purpose, revives him. By oct 1914 he's awarded iron cross 2nd class from Ypres. 30k peeps in his regiment only 350 left alive. Survives another fifteen battles. Wounded several times.

  V. dangerous job - regimental courier, has to run thru lines carrying msgs under fire. In Aug 1918 he's awarded iron cross 1st class (rare for noncom), but the regimental diaries were destroyed and we don't know what he got it for. Must've been something quite courageous.

  Is wounded again on oct12 1918, gassed by the brits. Temporarily blinded, misses end of the war, does not witness what happens.

Eoww1
  German army and political system collapsing from within; german soldiers start deserting and revolt. Kaiser resigns while Hindenburg and Luddendorf escape to the netherlands. The 2nd reich founded by Bismarck collapses and a republic is declared. 

  Friedrich Ebert takes power, leader of social dems. Parallels with the Russian revolution. Concerned that the Bolsheviks will take over and turns to the Junkers in the army (the mil aristocracy, the vons) and reinstalled to the German army and march into Berlin as a victor parade. 

  Starts the myth that Army was undefeated and stabbed in the back by jews and commies. Street fighting begins in 1919 and a small civil war breaks out.

  There's so much fighting in Berlin that the gov't moves to Weimar and write their constitution there, elected president and chancellor.
  
In Versailles,
  the treaty totally breaks up Europe.
  formation of Poland, yugoslavia, czechoslovakia
  Rhineland is forcibly demilitarized, Alsa Lorraine is returned to the FR.
  Saar becomes a pseudo neutral zone before returning to Germany.

  Germany is demil
    all major mil stuff has to be destroyed, no big guns, only 'defensive' technology. Army reduced to 100,000 men and the police has to remain at the same level before the war started. 

    As a result, in the civil war they hire paramilitaries - the freikorps that help the German army suppress left wing radicals. Many of them go directly to the nazi party.

Hitler at this point is one the 100,000 men left in the German army.
  His regiment is in Bavaria when the commies seize power, and get told that they should elect representatives amidst the mil units. Hitler gets elected as their representative - tells them to lie low till they get rescued. Hitler gets commended and promoted and becomes an indoctrination speaker.

  Explain to new recruits how their loyalty should shift from Kaiser to the Repubic. Also used as a spy and infiltrate other political groups.

  Told to infil the German Workers Party, which strangely has a swastika as a symbol, which used to represent pol factions that believe that there is a unique German people, the Arians which possesses a communal soul which includes trees and animals - curiously enough they enact strongest environmental laws.

  By extension if someone does not belong to the racial soul, their very presence is like a cancer. 

  Only something like 60 guys, obv not communists when some guy on the stage says something he does not like and debates the dude off the stage. After the meeting, its leadership goes to Hitler and says you gotta join us you're a great speaker.

  Unknown what happens over the next 3 or 4 months, but somehow Hitler begins to take over the party. Renamed Nationalsozialistische Deustche Arbeiterpartei (Nazi), National Socialist German Workers Party. 

  Two things that are facing Hitler as he begins to over the party:
    Unbelievable inflation taking place in Germany
    4 marks to the dollar in 1914, April 1921 after the reparations announcement it's worth 18,000 dollar, july 350,000 to the dollar, by Nov 4.2 trillion marks to the dollar - literally not worth the paper its printed on.

    People have to be paid three times a day as prices are raised constantly. Wipes out the middle class. War profiteers have their debst wiped out, become rich.

French occupy the Ruhr in 1921 after they fail to pay some reparations. 
  Brutal occupation; first nazi martyrs made here.

# jen grant
jg398@cam.ac.uk

#nov4

mussolini takes power by threatening to march on rome
takes a heavy handed approach to foreign policy
  a border guard is shot and mussolini uses this as a pretense to attack the greeks
  GR go to league of nations
    and we see its first failure
    IT insists it's a bilateral matter b/w GR and IT and settled within the auspices of the border commission and refuses to cooperate

    IT is still an Ally of UK and FR and so they back their position
    GR left to hang in the wind
    Demonstration that the league will not work without backing from the great powers

    Corfu crisis 1923
      typically of future failures
      when IT and JP invade other countries

  Hitler becomes a great admirer of Mussolini and his fascist movement
  He forms the his own paramilitary group, the SS

Disguises them as sports units
Pick brown shirts cos of surplus of African Korps uniforms, tropical camouflage no longer needed

With the hyperinflation and the Ruhr crisis, in 1920 the Nazi party grows immensely - by 1923 they have 55,000 card carrying members (probably half a million germans). In 1924 he decides he's gonna march on Munich the same way Mussolini did, and tries to seize power in Bavaria.

German states are very powerful; if he can seize Bavaria he can trigger revolutions everywhere else. He aligns himself with other right wing parties and goes and takes cabinet members hostage, but his idiot subordinates let them go. The coup fails, 16 nazis are killed.

Hitler put on trial; his trial introduces him to the rest of germany. Promotes himself through the trial, receives a five year sentence and serves 7 months.

Takes the time to write Mein Kampf, which becomes a huge best seller. Makes him a millionaire. Basically outlines his entire plans and his beliefs. 
  Two main aspects:
    Lebensraum
      Living space
      Old german notion that Germany should expand eastward into Poland, Ukraine, Russia, there the Germans could form a breadbasket. All locals to be called save some portion to work as slaves on farms. 
      on top of that he grafts his anti semitic beliefs, stemming from the Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion. A Russia secret service forgery which outlines the Jew's plans to take over the world.

      How do we know it's a forgery? 'Cos there's another book like it published in 1864 called 'dialogues in hell' with the same text. Dude was originally writing a satire about French bureuacrats. Russia, post loss with Japan, wanted to blame its defeat on someone else, hence the jews.

      Due to his anti communist fighter credentials - the one thing standing between the commie wave threatening the world - most of the west turns a blind eye towards their jewish cleansing

While Hitler is in jail, the Chancellor is trying to normalize relations with Britain, France and rest of Europe.
    Best chance is at the Genoa conference in Italy, and establish a new economic system. The first conf where they are (and the USSR) are invited as equal partners.

    Stressman and the Soviets suddenly run off to a town near by and sign ab ilateral rappello treaty in 1922 forgiving each other and recognizing each other's territory. Russia's opportunity to gain entry to Europe. There's also a secret protocol - allow the German army to secretly train in the Soviet Union outside of the eyes of the Versailles commissioners.

    Stresseman commissions a general to review DE mil policy in ww1 as to why was there such a stalemate. Dude interviews all the senior commanders and writes a book in 1921 - 
    leadership and battle with combined arms
      Defines what we will call the 'blitzkrieg'
      dude argues that mil units needs to combine their arms - every battalion needs to have armor, artillery, engineers, etc. In the past an army was all infrantry or all armor, etc.

    Ironically, the USSR trains all the Germans who will invade them, and then Stalin executes 90% of his most experienced combat commanders.

At this moment, the US is completely uninterested in Europe.
Calvin Coolidge's slogan is "the business of America is business"
  isolationism not quite correct; US financial markets investing heavily in Europe, they are the richest they have ever been. FR and UK debtor nations, and they are loaning money to Germany to pay reparations to the UK and FR to invest in German industry. Americans buy shares in German industry and create an income tax base.

    The richest period in US history up to that point.
    First age of celebrities. 

    When Hitler comes out of jail, it's a whole new Germany.
    Everything has stabilized.

If the Nazi party is allowed to reform, he promises to respect constitution. His greatest enemies are inside the party, who think he's thus a sellout.
Hitler does poorly in the next election, considers retiring. 

  Germany booms. 
  What changes... is the great depression.

Impact in Germany is dramatic.
  Unemployed goes from 650k to 6 million in 4 years.
  People become disillusioned with democracy, the constitutional revolutional and start longing for the return of someone like the Kaiser. As workers are drawn to the Communist party, Only the Nazis can stop them!
  Have street brawls with them. Starts getting huge amounts of seats and forms a coalition, and within a few years removes all of his adversaries and becomes a dictator.



#nov9

stalin
  grew up desperately poor
  his father, a horrible alcoholic, abandons them

  not a terribly gifted young man, but he's a doer (ominous)
  street smart, knows how to survive
  accidents in history:
    hitler, failed art student
    stalin was a priest, won a scholarship to a seminary
    were not for the russian revolution he would have been some anonymous orthodox priest

  joins the anti tsarist movements in his late teens
  being in Georgia, he's an ethnic minority
  spends most of the war in a tsarist camp, released when bolsheviks come to power
  had met lenin in 1905 in finland (was kind of disappointed, expected him to be a mountain)

  one of the first jobs he gets (eventually becomes secretary) but before he has to demonstrate his werewithal
    commissar of the minorities
      a political officer if you like
      make sure that the ethnic minorities in the outlying areas, well, do what they are told.

      does this without great diplomatic aplumb
      eliminates tens of thousands of fellow georgians, armenians, azerbeijani, etc

      so successful that Lenin makes some comments, it's how he rises

  when lenin dies in 1924, there is a power void for two years
    no elections of course
    a rivalry ensues

    thing to know about nazis, commies - never really monolithic
    both of these regimes highly stratified
      men and ministries that are constantly jockeying for authority

    a lot of little dictators struggling to become big dictators

    lenin died prematurely, after series of heart attacks and strokes
      on his deathbed he made it very clear against stalin taking over the state, knew that he was too methodical and too much of a doer
      his nurse was a paid stalin informant, and they begin to outmaneuver lenin's widow and so on

    great quotes:
      calls her a bitch, a syphilitic whore
      "lenin has died and so will you"

    how do you get power by being street smart?
      win over various segments of society

      you have to have various components of society with you
	the media, a secret police and you should control the .mil
	stalin is an expert at getting them

    he's insane enough to actually talk to spolice
      the CHEKA, NKVD, GRU (eventually KGB)
      russians don't do anything small
	uk intel 30 or 40
	us nonexistent
	240,000 paramilitary agents
	extensive apparatus

      when lenin built the regime he wanted a special system of violence and defend the revolution without pity

    stalin wins them over by appointments or promises the leaders more power and authority if they support him
      people who engage in this stuff are kind of evil

    by 1926 (span of 18 mo) engineered enough support to go after top rival, leon trotsky 
      brain behind bolshevik revolution
      a jew, which causes problems
      trotsky is brilliant but not very street smart
	doesn't plan as well to get the big guys on board
      successfully outmaneuvered

    stalin stages a variety of false accusations
      massive smear campaign
      arrests him in his pajamas
      allegedly the agents who arrested him were crying, but he tells them to follow their orders
      exiled for 14 years until 1940

    stalin never forgets or forgives
      in 1940 he has trotsky assassinated
      plans an agent who works thru his network in mexico city
      takes two years, and shoves an icepick through his brain

    stalin: methodical madness, eliminate all your rivals.


when stalin comes to power, he adopts some policies that lenin brought in and adds his own spin to things
  economic program - collectivisation
    relies on size of soviet populus
    and that it's mainly agricultural and rural country
    mass collectivise the farms of the new state
    variety of fashions:
      physically uproot people and run giant, huge farms
      or simply confiscate all property and force labour for the state
    mix and match of the two
    goal to mass produce food

    whole spirit behind mass producing food to have well fed workers to be foricbly moved into industrial infrastructures
    mass accelerate mass industrialization of soviet 
    thus become stronger than enemies
    involves mass urbanization

    big problem: economy fails in the process
      mass exodus provokes all sorts of minute problems no one thought of
      leads to greatest famine in history

      combined with notoriously bad weather patterns
      systematic famnies and droughts

      at the same time this produces tens of millions of people without sufficient food

      in some areas where there was productivity, there was no infrastructure to store, process and transport the food.

    death toll of about 7-8 million people.
    did achieve big productivity in industrial realm

  political program - series of purges referred collectively as pogrom
    depended on some particular issue or rival he would set up a purge
    often to shake up own regime or eliminate individuals who became too powerful and dangerous

    need to understand: everyone is part of the purges
    in the process you become complicit in the system
    either you are the enemy or you rat out the enemy

    vast majority of people just want to avoid any contact with authority
    keep their heads down

    problem is: millions of people die in this complicity.
    secret police had quotas to meet.

    colletively these purges are est. between 5 and 10 million people.
    
  just talking about interwar period
  1922-1939
      these two programs take 15-20 million
  in ww2: 30 million citizens will die
    between fifty and sixty million will perish under communism


  also famous for the gulag, a series of prisons in serbia
    no guards, no barbed wire, nothing
    literally in the middle of nowhere
    exists until 1970s
  

in context, Great Depression
we will never live through the Great Depression
it was The Great Depression as it was a very unique historical event
unlikely to ever happen again

  much of the world economy unfolded because of this, and was redesigned to make this never happene again

  world trade tottally different, investment requirements very different
  analogy not very big
  if you get desperate throw anything on great depression, it is the vanvas on which rest of course is portrayed

  so important to understand context of the time
  when market collapses on black tuesday oct 29 1929, everything comes down

  four elections between 1928 and 1932
    Hitler gets largest vote %, keeping in mind people voting against Hitler
    main reason for people tolerating Hitler was the Great Depression
      his programs and policies seen as somehow being better than alternative
      fairly inclusive list of people saw this as a reasonable alternative

  
  by 1931 there are 5 million unemployed in Germany (20%)
  all sorts of difficulties elsewhere
    between sept 3 and nov 13 of 1929
      50% of all stock value in the world is lost
      never been duplicated before or since

      founder of GM lost $40 mil in one minute
      business close
      in <18 months 85k businesses close
	3300 banks, which take your savings with them
	24k banks eventually close shop
      
      1931-1938
	almost two thirds of all trade and investment come to a halt
      
      in canada and the us a giant windstorm hits in 1934 and makes it all the way thru the continent
      300 million tons of topsoil are caught in this windstorm and thrown across the world
      reporting of black bizzards in various cities
      without this topsoil there is no agricultural production
      massive droughts in Canada and in the US


    colossal economic collapse
    everything that takes its cue from the united states (after ww1 the world leading creditor)
    US does some unfortunate things
      Smoot Hawley tariff 1930
	enormously high tariff wall best represented by this one
	50% tariff on any goods coming in

	on top of your own production costs you now have to pay 50% tax just to get it into american markets, which means it's effectively closed to you
	without a market you go out of biz

      hardest hit places:
	Germany
	  US funded so much of their reconstruction that w/o US investment there are conditions for a total collapse, and ideal conditions for dudes like Hitler
	  new infrastructure projects, spend as a gov't so that the peopel feel confident and vigorous
	  accelerates in people's minds and hearts that the nazis got the answer
	  beyond the german borders it becomes a model.
	  when FDR comes in, his policies beginning at the same time (got in power at the same time, Jan 1933)
	  many of New Deal projects are similar to Hitler's

	Japan

Lebensraum
  'living room of the german people'
  meant german territories taken away at eoww1 (polish corridor, sudentenland, etc)
  also means beyond those boundaries
    german people are innately better, racially superior and going to command a great deal of living room to grow and feed their people.

  From a fp perspective important footnote
    german territories, sure, but new territories are occupied by other people. mein kampf ends up being a blueprint for war, without explicitly putting it out.
    lebensraum automatically means conflict

  Where to? The east.
  Means to occupy slavic territories

  Slavs considered nothing better than monkeys and slave labour.
  Includes Poles, Ukrainians, Russians, etc.

  Never actually talks about global conflict, but he designed it from the beginning. Poland and Ukraine. 19th century notions of controlling the continent.

Get away from this comical notion of him getting into power and starting war. Between 1933 and 1938 most people think he's gonna be trouble but not a big deal.
  No precedence for Hitler.
  Most people had thought ww1 on the working assumption tht they would never have to fight another war again. Assume that even Hitler, esp Hitler a soldier himself, would never want to go to war again.
  
  Most leaders in the West also tolerated him because he was not Communist.
  Hitler understood that Western pathological fear of Communism could be used. Sleepwalker of history. Between 1933 and 38 his FP his fairly shrewd, intelligent and it works.

  Drives the West and the Soviets apart, to avoid fighting on two fronts again. In 1933, he can't do anything. For the most part he wears a suit and tie, and was reportedly quiet and soft spoken, odd little man but quite likeable.
  A lot of people met Hitler and thought he complained about reasonable things. No one actually thought that he'd care so much about jews, gypsies and so on, not like he immediately started going after them. Systemtic execution is done much later.

  Last thing he wants is to aggravate people before he is in a position of strength. Hampered by the Versailles treaty by a small military force.
  Most of the time he was quite reasonable in his arguments, and articulates a policy that was agreeable.

Nuremberg Laws
  systematically divides german people by ethnicity.
  if you weren't completely german you could be barred from many positions.
  Many people were forced to flee cos they understood what it meant.
  Literally done by a bureacuracy. Ranks within this.
  Very obvious attempts by the state to consolidate power.

  Keep in mind: no monolithic regime
  nazis very competitive amongst themselves
  concentration camps designed to take up large amounts of resources, set up near industrial zones. These are economic entities in of themselves.

  A lot of this run by a hiearchy of men. 

Schutzstaffel (SS)
  horrendous bastards, ideological police, sure
  start off as hitler's personal bodyguard, knights of the aryan realm
  
  Not the german army. One component of the state.
Also have the Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe
  lots of them hated the SS, thought they were kooks.

In order to run a state, you have to win over the people and subdue them. Hitler does this by a series of laws and eliminations.
Ernst Rohm, a homo, done got killed (early supporter)
Almost from the word go, we have huge rivalries between agencies.
State police, the Gestapo (60k people only), convinced people that they are coming for you. Did stuff in broad daylight, force people to become complicit.

Complicity works for people within and outside the state.
  First thing he does is leave a disarmament conf in 1933
    excuse? we only have 100k men, whatever!
    allies say eh I guess that's fair

  London Naval Conf 1935
    same deal

  what people don't realise is that he's removing himself from the int'l community so he can act with impunity.
  Turns around and says we need to build a viable army that will defend us from the communists! In 1935 there is no public will to go to war against the Germans. Pursues a vigorous rearmament policy.


#nov11

Hitler is a fairly gifted diplomat, and preys on the pathological fear of Communism. Giving him all that credit is a bit much, but the men around him were well versed in foreign affairs. Many of the intellectual elite have bought in or are the Nazi regime. 
At the top you have your Hitlers and your Himmlers, who were not terribly sophisticated, but immediately below them in the top bureaucracy had many gifted men. 

Understand context:
  Great Depression
    debilitates other countries
    
    allows people to tolerate a guy like Hitler  
      do not look back on this period and sayn "they should not have allowed them to do that", but we foresight.
      totally reasonable claims, up until 1939, and the idea that we had the war to end all wars.
      latent support of fascism, thought that it was a reasonable ideology
	swell of nationalism
	rebuilt the economy
	maybe democracy and capitalism has failed and this guy has the right idea

      very hard to get people motivated when things are far away.
      No one knows what's coming.

      Appeasement was not a term used at the time, just a general description of western powers' policy as they were reluctant to go off in some far place.


Japan
  first major threat to league of nations comes to JP
  JP most complicated of all on the road to ww2
  It's impossible to understand jp's road unless you know about europe first, but you can do it the other way around.

  First fundamental crisis:
    when jp invades manchuria in 1931 they violate the League of Nations
      straight up, no question
      China is a League member, JP is, you are supposed to intervene on the attacked side.

      Precipitates major int'l crisis
	JP in effect gets away with it and leaves the League over it, Feb 1933. Shitty cos they were one of the most important players.
	Hitler is greatly encouraged by this.


First thing Hitler does is withdraw from a disarmemnt conf in '33
  misnomer in German's case, no air force, no artillery, limited army
  even the boy scouts are banned, no hunting clubs, nothing

  Hitler says (understandbly) we don't need to come here, waste of my time
  Allies say: Eh, OK.
    Sets a precendent for him to remove Germany
    leaves League of nations later on.

Germany ofc is not allowed to rearm
  other peeps look at it with great deal of concern
  compounded by the fact that there is no money
  once US goes thru its depression the major funder of DE society is out of the game.

  Question of rearmament is theoretical for the most part.
  Unless of course you use massive deficit spending, funneling cash into a military economy.
    By direction of the German gov't, Hitler will direct HUGE gov't expenditures towards a mil economy

  Cleverly,
    begins incrementally, builds a kind of momentum
    all major manufacturers are now encouraged and pursuaded to begin building things that are necessary for the mil
    in the 1920s, the Weimar republic had begun a limited scale (illegally) rearmament as they trained their armed forces in Russia. Lasted only a few years, but their command core was up and about.

    built things in such a way where they could be used to civvy use but quickly converted to mil use.
      i.e. airplanes, merchant marines, digging coal/iron ore

    what he needs ofc is to take huge expenditures used in civvy purposes into mil needs

    between '33-39 the German economy will be redirected to an extraordinary length
      US today dedicates <2% of GDP to mil needs.
      DE spends 50% of GDP.
	highest ratio of all time

    in this light the DE economy is now very very specified.
    Other nations do not remobilize; the FR are prolly the best, and cos it's a democracy (in a dictatorship you can do all you like), FR is highly factionalized.
      very lopsided proposition
      months not years become an issue

      they start in '33 and when they accel the program in '36 they have another year and a half before the others even begin rearmament

      UK will only hit it up in '37.
      By the time you have war brand new fast DE planes will be flying around and the UK will have ww1 vintage aircraft.

    In other to understand his FP he needs a rearmament program first.

    He's missing something really really big.
      Resources:
	Needs the Rhineland
    can't understand Hitler without seeing these increments

Follows up by leaving London Naval conf in '35
  manages to elicit a guarantee that DE will be allowed to rebuild part of surface fleet
    ridiculous concession no?
      DE is always on the risk of collapse
	highly stratified state
	lots of COMMIES
      unless they have a big force they are on the behest of Russia
      playing on UK obsession with balance of power
	why they were reluctant to keep DE crushed post ww1
      give me enough balance to check FR or RU

      No public will for anuthing but peace
      so concept of dealing with Hitler is a low priority

  greatly encourage. Give him anything he emboldens

  post conf he announces that he intends to rearm
    nervous, expected that the Allies would come steaming in and crush him
    but the Allies obsessed with their own banking issues and lacking a strong army of their own, grumble about it but don't do anything
    
    makes a reasonable case that he needs to reinvigorate its armed forces
      everyone understands its a violation of versailles

  in '34 he makes a non agression pact with Poland
    I don't attack you, you don't attack me
    no one uses your territory to attack us

    preys upon on Polish (rightful) obsession on the danger of Soviet aggression. They are NOT friends. Poles profoundly anti communist, anti russian. With this in mind Hitler secures a barrier against the Soviets.
      buys the Poles the opportunity to stand up to one enemy

    program designed for the future. prevents Poland from becoming friendly with the east.


Next major crisis in Austria 1934
  pretty confident but he needs much more for his program
  he planned the war from the outset

  up until this point he's successful but here he kind of fucks up
  
  Crisis in Austria is a financial one
  lots of right wing cronies stirring trouble
    Austrians weary of Hitler

  nazi connected peeps assissinate Austrian prime minister Dollfuss
  Hitler sends what small army he has to the Austrian frontier with the idea that his soldiers will intervene to 'keep the peace' and try to occupy Austria

  example of being too cocky for his own good
  Allies concerned with German soldiers lying around, but not much they can do about it. Low public will.

  In this standoff an unlikely moderator steps in and Mussolini offers to settle scores.

  Mussolini hated Hitler
    been in power ten years later
    grandfather of right wing movements
    refers to him as that little shit
    received basically love letters in 1925 from him

    fascism: not this international ideological movement
    very nationalist based

    classic opportunist
      was a HS teacher, socialist, journalist
      classic fascist definition
      just take adv

      sees it more advantageous to support the Allies instead of Hitler

  Mussolini sends soldiers to the southern part, and a tense standoff for a few weeks. Hitler withdraws his soldiers and the crisis comes to an end.
    he comes off as heroic and comes off as a big fish
    Italy actually had one of the largest armies and surface navy
    looks great on paper, if not great fighters

  With this momentum the Allies try to keep him on their side.
  Even tho he's a fascist, IT is in League

  Peeps agree to Stresa conference
    to keep three powers together to check DE ambitions

    IT wanted to hear promises for their support, not just work together
    gets a lil bit shaky
    proceedings are fairly standard, but what the italians are there for to negotiate a series of concessions, part. the acquisition of empire in africa - very much part of mussolini's persona, all about grandeur
    
    when he goes to Stresa he is talking between the lines about his empire
    gets really sinister
      even tho officially they don't offer anything, secretely the UK and the FR devise a pact the Hoare-Laval pact
      secretely agree amongst themselves to give IT concessions in N.Africa, specifically Ethiopia (abyssinian).
      
      a journalist blows it, and makes it public which humiliates the UK and the FR (their gov't falls over this).

      Abyssinia was actually a member of the League of Nations!
      It had all the rights to collective security.

      Even tho the pact does not materialise it becomes a huge issue.

italians seize on it anyways and in oct '35 IT invades ethiopia
precipitates the second major crisis for the League of Nations
  worst news is that the League is powerless to do anything
  it means mil intervention of the UK and the FR against IT
    insofar as sanctions, the consideration comes up
    Cdn comes up with concept of sanctions?
    all of the league members say no, don't like it

  US comes around and says, we'll supply the IT if you guys impose sanctions. Only good news is that the IT are absolutely horrible.

  takes them a precipitously long time to win the war.

  Huge blow. Whole world is humiliated, league looks terribly weak.

In 1937 IT leaves the League.
Hitler is greatly emboldened by this and so he accel his own FP.
Now he gets to focus on the main prize, the rhineland.

Gets lucky when a plebiscite held in the Saar in '35 returns it to Germany.Now makes a very desperate/important bid for the rhineland.
For weeks makes a semi reasonable argument re: rhineland
In march '36 he takes his army and marches it into the rhineland.

Hitler was terrified that he would be checked - he knew that his armies were totally incapable of fighting. The armies in the rhineland could have thrwarted them easily. Had the FR been smart they could have marched out and squashed them. 
Instead? they do nothing. Not prepared to fight a war over the Rhineland. We've occupied this for 20 years. When the soldiers come in and are greeted by thousands of crying people, the Allies' hands are tied.

Hitler is greatly encouraged and now he has the resources to rebuild his army.

Finally, he cements his relationship with Italy.
They do not like each other, but post taking over the rhineland
Rome-Berlin Axis 'pact of steel' 1936
  for it and de to work together, intimidate allies

  cemeted with the anti-comintern pact 1937



#nov16

no such thing as a unique fascist movement
rather a number of national reactions to it.

Spain - a fascist state until the 1970s will not fight in ww2.
On the surface in the 1930s it certainly seemed the case
  - fear that there is an int'l fascist movement.

  shake yr family trees hard enough you will find fascist, commies or both

  post ww2 generation is ridiculously apathetic.

majority of people don't subscribe or like nazism - but they don't have a single voice oppossing it - a highly fragmented front against them
  fascists more organized - they have things to be pissed off about
  can pick on jews, commies, appeal to common denominators

  on other side mass amounts of people whose only thing in common is that they dislike fascists
    the popular fronts
      throughout europe
      a very loose coalition, generally everybody on the left and the middle of the political spectrum
      enormous coalition of parties

      in France - conservatives (not fascists), christian democrats, royalists or monarchists, socialists, communists and different kinds of communists. People who support Stalin and you would see Trotskysts. Also have anarchists.
      whole mess of the popular front
      these political divisions are rough but it's very much an international dichotomy.

      Big problem: vast majority of people totally apathetic - just want to live.
      In the need to win the hearts and minds of the great unwashed, they become the focus - this is where context comes in, this is where the Great Depression comes in. 
      Few people would subscribe to these radical regimes if they knew everything upfront. They take advantage of particular circumstances, and people's insecurities and weaknesses.

      Vast majority of people fairly in the middle.
  
  Little boxes don't work very well to define people.


Spanish Civil War 1936
  a great barometer
  so important, its really about this ideological divide in the world
  most interesting and most romantic (power passionate philosophically), dramatic stuff. War is relatively easy to describe
    former empire
    by 20th century nothing more of a shell of its former self
    Spain defeated by the US, clings to tiny chunks of Africa
    in the 30s the Spanish economy is extremely hard hit by Great Depression
    Terribly unimportant and not big at all.

    Why civil war?
      Breaks out along ideological lines
      Weakened state has a coalition gov't, very polarised country.
      Very divided entity, a pocket of many
      Add to the fact that they are well traveled and educated.

      To make it more complicated, vast majority of people are old style fashioned peasants who live in the country side. Overwhelmingly agrarian
      Most important quality is its religion, roman catholicism

	Enormously powerful entity in Spain.
	Very catholic state
	Much like Italy, very politicised
	Most fascists aren't terribly religious, but they do have one important thing - unlike the commies, who are atheists, the fascists are at least ambivalent about god, and thus there is a natural political union between fascists and catholics.

	Communism is the bad guy.

      With that in mind, v. conservative Spain is v. nervous about this intellectual communism. 

    Left of centre coalition gov't, the republicans. 
    Nationalists coalesce under Francisco Franco
      Not a fascist, but becomes one after the civil war
      controls mil, police and the media to some degree
      what they really have is a rural support and the catholics

    Try to launch a coup d'etat and it precipitates a very violent civil war.
    Half of Spain becomes divided.
    Republicans have another problem - they are so broad they are bound to fail. Hard to run a coalition with 7 or 8 major factions. Also lack any international support - and this is where the fascists are at an advantage.

    Italians and Germans see this as a great opportunity to spread their military and political muscle
      Hitler just took over Rhineland
      Italians just finished off Abyssynia

      Now they are certainly working in tandem and are fundamentaly challenging international order around them.

      Also opportunity to test out militaries.
      Germans haven't used their armies yet - great opportunity to help the nationalists and train their soldiers.

      Franco turns to them looking for support, with training and personnel

    On the other side, almost nothing at all.
    Republicans don't have this opportunity
      Two reasons
      1- It's the great depression
	neither US or FR have mil programs to send any support
      2- Appeasement and apathy
	further wedge between them and the DE and the IT

	League of Nations is impotent, US is out
	Russians are willing to help the Republicans - but the moment they become the main supporter it's easy for the other powers to walk away as they become tainted by Commie influence

    Central theme of the course:
      Anti communism prevalent notion in interwar period
      Hitler: Sleepwalker thru history

      Dooms republicans. 
	First and for all, far away from Spain. Hard to ship.
	More importantly, it only backs one faction of the Republicans, and only the Stalinists, not the other Communists.

	It makes the republicans look like a Commie front for a take over.
	(Which is what Stalin wanted)

    West is far worse - most gov'ts place legislation to prohibit them from engaging in Spanish civil war. While in theory against everyone, everybody knew that it was aimed against the Republicans.
      Kislenko reminds us about our apathy
	in 1936 notwithstanding the horrible situation, tens of thousands went to fight illegally against the will of their government. Went for different reasons. Many more went cos they believed in the Popular Front, and put their lives on the line. 

	The analogy is whether we would go and fight in Burma.
	Formed whole international Brigades fighting for the Republicans.
	Civil War ends up with little to do about Spain.

    Included George Orwell, as a commie (and becomes disatisfied), Hemingway, Norman Bethieu, etc.

    Testament to their generation.

    Guernica - bombed to shit, 20k people are murdered. 
    Picasso was there and writes and paints about it.

    Spain becomes a Fascist country by 1939. 
    But! Never an ally of the Germans and the Italians.
      Will lobby them to actively join the war, but they keep neutral.
      Also longest lasting fascist power of them all.

    Demolish concept of fascist brotherhood, but Hitler is now strongly encouraged to do even more. Hossbach plan basically a plan to take over Europe. By 1936/37 they are much more aggressive than ever before as the Allies never did anything.


Next step: Austria
  Of course Austria.
  His birthplace, the heartland of the Germanic people.
  He sees a union of the two countries as necessary
    its existence an uninterrupted act of treason.

  Should not blow our mind that he wants it to be part of Greater Germany.

  Bid in 1934 failed cos of the Italians.
  A lot has changed - Italy is now their poodle. It economy is in the dumps, they did poorly in Abyssynnia. By 38 they were more or less equal, but now they're on his team.

  He now has economic progress on his side.
  Austrians speak German - they know about his economic miracle in Germany
  Context again:	
    Austria has suffered disproportionately in Great Depression
    as their main exports were banking and chocolate
    Economy takes a huge nosedive, lots of young austrians who see a vigorous economic reconstruction in Germany

  Any bid to wed these two together is an act of war.
    He starts shit within Austria, targets the Austrian PM - Schussnigg
    Head of a troublesome coalition, he spends a lot of time fighting Austrian nazis. They burn down buildings, assassinate people, gradually intimidate people. A time honored tradition.

    Put the squeeze on Schussnigg - that they need to form an economic union, the anschluss.

    Opponents say that it would become a political takeover.

    Several years of debate about it unfold, and the disturbing acts of nazis.

    Come 1938 he makes a demand for it.

  Schussnigg is forced under great pressure to release nazis as a sign of clemency. Just to make it really embarassing, without western support he is also forced to accept into his gov't several prominent nazis. 

  Of course this is basically the end of moderate government in Austria.
  In 1938 has no choice to put forward a plebiscite on the issue of unification. Had it been a legitimate vote, it would have failed. Most austrians feared germans. 

  Don't forget that Austria has now thousands and thousands of German refugees; now they warned them. Vast majority see this for what it is.
  Unfortunately it's not a fair vote. Stack ballot boxes by bribes and intimidation and beat the crap out of opponents. 

  Nazis win plebiscite overwhelmingly. In march 1938 it begins.

  As soon as the word comes out, German troops cross out but have no intention of leaving. Within a few days they round up jews and commies - outright takeover.

  So dramatic cos the West saw this and understood and yet do nothing at all.

  Hitler assures them that this is his last demand.

Within just a few days the exact same trouble emerges in the Sudentenland.
Now Hitler agitates there as well, whips up German population in Czechoslovakia and installs his own stooge named Heilein.

Precipitates major international crisis in summer 1938. Oh yeah I also want the sudentenland. They agree to what is now called shuttle diplomacy, to the Munich conference in Sep. 1938

  Here instead of being soft spoken, he's belligerent.
  You come to ME.

  Mussolini is the chair of the conference.
  Chamberlain and Daladier show up, but not the USSR (despite an ardent desire, cos they are the only ones who could and would do something) and neither do the Czechs attend their own conference.

  Allowed to be in Munich but not in the proceedings themselves. Classic example of appeasement, join in the chorus of how weak the Western powers have become. Munich agreement of 'peace in our time', but Chamberlain lies.

  Post the conference, Hitler accel rearmamemnt process, and draws lines in the Sudentenland that are twenty km behind the mil defences (which no one else noticed). Czechoslovakia is hopeless. 

  Finally, he turns his attentions to Poland.

  Neither are the poles are stupid nor are the allies going to finally ignore it. Poland becomes a causus belli. 

Hitler has last trick up his sleeve - a pact with the USSR on the eve of ww2.



#Nov23

jp invades Manchuria for their resources
important things:
  country is falling apart
  CH dynasty can countrol the central part
  becaomes a 'wild east' controlled by war lords

  a kind of mafia, controlling massive armies

Russians build up railways to become a shining sea to sea power.
Japanese historically quite weighty. Historically and culturally tied to CH and Koreans. See opportunity to expand JP influence and exert their power over this whole area.

At the same time they see CH fall, they see Russia rise and the JP have this me-too attitude.

1894-1895 war with China.
  Korea - the poland of asian, caught between three nightmare neighbours.
  Separate culture, but heavily influenced by CH and JP.
  Korean royalty literally divided by pro CH and pro JP factions, who are warring between each other.

  JP trying to wean Korea from its dependency on a dying China and funding the pro JP faction.
  Most ppl at the time thought CH would win handily, massive army.
    totally forgot JP was no fool, and they overhauled their army to a modern one. Crack troops efficiently trained with a much more powerful navy.
  Quick war in jp's favour. Have huge influence on Korean and now possess territory in the peninsula.

  JP becomes a continental power, and gains a 'taste' for more and more.

  next step comes in 1900

Boxer rebellion 1900
  Chinese nationalists against Western powers
  boxers cos their name translates to 'fists of righteous etc'
  to demonstrate that they were no longer under imperialist oppression and they cut off their ponytails, 'boxed' their hair

  CH nationalist in 100s of thousands, rise up and attack Western possessions
    Some of these are really violent, rape, burning, etc

  All of the countries send contigents to kick CH ass. Cloest power that can help these sieged colonies is Japan.

  Takes weeks for reinforcements to arrive, but they did. Six armies at once working in unison (weird cos they were about to have ww1).

  Short but bloody. JP closest to situation and save their and the possessions of other powers. Play a card that demonstrates they are very pro western. JP rises as a western ally.

  Pays off almost immediately.

1902 British in effect reward JP with the Anglo Jap Naval Treaty
  UK purseu it to secure their interests
  JP are invited to the Western diplomatic table
  Both feared Russia
  Core of the treaty resigned every ten years

Jap-Russo war,
  they win and gain more control over the region, over railroads
  ten years after sino jap war they have this realm of generations
  over time one nation's claim to territory is magnified by how long they've been there, the more of your citizens who live there.

  Japan becomes embolden

1910 it formally annexes Korea, where it becomes a JP province until 1945.
  before ww1, China goes through another revolution (there are a LOT of them). Nothing is small in China. 
  Always have to be followed by the number of the revolution. The revolution of 1911.
  This is a revolution that sweeps into relative power the ch nationalists
    a generic term but men who are ostensibly attached to the west (somewhat pro jp as a consequence).
    irreligious but increasingly christian
    talk the talk about western oriented nationalists

    they don't really mean it, bureaucrats and warlords, but ostensibly 'nationalists', reject monarchy, want to follow a drift to western development

  Critical to understand that they do not control the mainland, no one is ever in control of mainland until 1949. 

  China's revolution is all about JP
    they see a very quixotic government (that doesn'tr control the country) and nobody really controls the revolution, already factionalizing.

    Spells end of the Qing dynasty.

    The last emperor of China is removed (never allowed outside the forbidden city).
    
    20th century hits China really hard, ancient culture forced out by these broadly defined nationalists inspired by the fr revolution

    This is what jp watches, but it can't act forcibly.
    Not secretely sitting there plotting; any aggressive action in China, esp against a pro western gov't, would anger the western world.


When ww1 breaks out, the JP are formally British allies
  resigned treaty in 1912
  two years later, JP also goes to war; doesn't send troops, but occupies German possessions in Asia pacific.
  JP who suffer almost nothing, basically do what they are told what to do and are instrumental in ww1
  Problem: they sense a wonderful opportunity
    people too occupied in Europe

    JP makes the 21 demands (1915):
      revolves around 2 points
	demand extra territoriality - JP extends its political occupation of the area, extend their territory
	economically tie China to Japan
	  force a series of trade concessions to Japan
      
      JP bullying China proper
	a new and shaky regime, try it clandestinely

    almost immediately catches wind of the Westerners
      UK and FR are not happy but they are not ultimately interested, they are fighting a war
      US tho are perturbed, and posture as the protector of China
	we don't like yr 21 demands
	let's reinforce the 'open door' concept
	  US policy for past 50 yrs
	  that china should always be left 'open' so that no one colonial power should be allowed to dominate

	how Wilson played and some CH took it, is that the US would protect the Chinese
	Forces JP to formally rescind the 21 demands

    --> From now on: keep a detailed list of how JP gets pissed off.
    
    Immediately following the war, this modern China becomes a member of the League of Nations; western choice is howto balance JP demands against another League member.
      Do we follow traditional diplomacy or protect self determination?

    Japan is NOT happy.
      Question of cooperation with the West becomes problematic
      Important to see the vision between JP factions, hst is thematic

Paris 1918-1919
  JP sit as part of the Big Five
  don't participate anywhere near as much
  only talk bout Asia Pacific
    try to make another case that they should get something for their effort
      Yes, we understand there is a new gov't, but they do not control the country, there are bandits and warlords everywhere. It's not really a lawful country - WE are the voice of stability and reason in China
      Not trying to take it over; they believed this argument, and to an extent they are right. It is a really weak country.

  Also put forth the Racial Equality Clause
    not that they are civil rights activists;
    wanted an acknowledge that they, the JP are equal to the Western powers. Japan is a profoundly racist society, sees other South Asians as inferior. Gives them a greater resonance and legitimacy to their claims

    Westerners don't want to talk about it, cos of their various colonial possessions. When it gets defeated, Japan is FURTHER ALIENATED


The motherload comes with the disarmament conference in Washington in 1921-1922. 
  Dichotomy of the 20s, hope and pacifism but ack that war came about partiallyk about the naval race
  push to disarm the world's navies
  if we control the navay fleets of the world, then we'll no longer have a pretext for war - not true but their thinking at the time

  All is fine and good, and the JP say sure, we get it. But they are not aware that the US have a pretext for this; they intend to include clauses on the "territorial integrity" of China.
  The reason they get invited is a trick:
    unknown to them the US are utilizing their intel capabilities, and they tapped JP diplomatic cables, knowing in advance what their bargaining position is.

    US quite dasterdedly. They get a warning about the CH integrity thing, but it's not in the spirit of talks.

    They find a host of different things:
      divise a "five power" treaty (FR UK IT US JP)
	agree to a limitation on the construction of their navies
	done on a formula based on tonnage
	all sorts of projections based on 'mil needs' and what its existing surface fleet looks like and ofc in terms of means. very cumbersome
	  eventually divised on a ratio basis, five powers get diff ratios
	  IT gets 1, FR, JP 2.75, UK and US get highest ratios
	    have 'bigger need for it'
	
	not quite evil and devious, but from their POV its semi reasonable
	from JP POV this is not cool
	you are punishing *us* cos you guys lost in ww1, we're having to pay the price for your own folly in ww1.
	JP's argument that they need the fleet is not convincing: no one left to challenge them in asia-pacific - who are you gonna use it against?
	JP forced to swallow their pride.

      However, JP is dependent on trade. Where before they traded with everyone, now only the US can buy their exports. The US have great leverage over JP and force them to acknowledge this treaty.

      Same conference, but diff treaty
      9 power treaty
	ack and promises to protect territory integrity of China
	rationale is against whom? Who is the only threat?

	JP take it exactly what it is intended
	  they find offense at this.
	  Nonetheless they have to sign it
	    trade dependency
	    and want to work not fight the West
      
      Finally, there is an inclusion of 'non fortification' of pacific islands. Prohibits fortified islands in the pacific; if they are fortified they are projections of power.
      Americans make sure you can't do this. The approach to Japan in the event of a war would be clean; convenient cos the US already had the Phillipines and Hawai and Guam which are already heavily fortified. Terrible US hyprocrisy
      JP again has to sign it.

Finally, the new Anglo Jap Naval Treaty comes up again during this W. conf
  Well this is shit, but at least we get to renew this treaty
  UK however pull the plug
    in 1902 you go against Russia
    in 1912 you go against Germany
    in 1922 only reasonable power left is against the US
      not in the UK's interests anymore
      exactly how the Americans see this (not one but two administrations) as against American inclinations.
      even go to British colonial dominions like AUS and CA and tell them to talk to the UK.

    given that UK trade is also heavily dependent on Americans, easy to see British to drop this.

  Japanese see this really negatively. JP is progressively alienated against the world order.


Factions in gov't
  traditionalist militarists against the moderate civilians
  reject notion that modernising involves turning to the west
  very militaristic

  leads to terrorists groups
    'cherry blossom' group
    basically a giant secret club, top journalists, gov't officials, biz men
    the organization wants to go out and eliminate (buy, isolate, kill) leading members of the opposing faction
    over couse of 1920s and 30s are assumed to be behind 3 prominent assassinations in JP including a prime minister

    want to tilt the balance

Imperial Way
  a faction of the military
    militaries are generally very political entities
    only in NA do you not see a political military

    danger of gov't being usurpd by mil is higher in other places
    in Japan's case what you see emerge is a highly politicised army

    works on two important distinctions
      the factions are interservice as well as intergeneration
      the 'military' is split into branches
	armies and navies are highly political amongst themselves
	most wealthy young men when they go into service go into the navy
	generally the army is for the lower classes

	in Japan it's abundently true
	the divide between the two branches is accute in regards for foreign policy for obv reasons

      generation div is as follows
	in militaries it means everything
	your entire career is mapped out with your graduating class
	very much id'ed by your generation
	men who were apart of the meiji reformation
	a lot of the mil senior men were educated overseas
	  understood strategy, culture of the west

	after ww1, the number drops off precipitously
	  junior officers are not generally well traveled, and grow up amidst these list of transgressions, more conservative in nature

	  by the time it comes to Pearl Harbour, the senior planners are the ones least inclined to want to engage in that fight due to pressure from the mid tier of the officer corps
	
	as the old generation starts to retire, the younger crowd is far more traditionalist. 

    the imperial way is an army based corps.
      the nature of mil politics is such, the navy tends to be more open minded but the army becomes the engine of angry Japan

  the Kwantung Army
    situated in Manchuria
    by late 1920s theyve been there for 20+ years.
    now it becomes dominated by ultra nationalist faction

Of course, we come back to the Great Depression
  US raises tariffs
  US investments overseas dries up, and their markets do so as well

  Japan, dependent on the US for everything, is SCREWED. 85% of their steel, 90% of their oil, 60-70% of everything else comes from oil.
  Even more so than Germany
    Not unusual to see large business travel groups showing up in Canada to go to big industrial scrap yards and bought up steel

  why do we keep dealing with the West when they constantly fail us?
    Soviet Russia seems to be ok, fascist Italy is doing great
    Japanese dependence on trade is their achilles heal

  in sept 1931 this army decides to act on this
    sets off an incident
    JP controls most of Manchuria, but this doesn't mean much - lots of roving warlords occasionally attack JP possessions
    everyone knew these were the warlords. JP saw these bandits as working in tandem with the CH nationalist govt. They can't attack us cos that would be war; they deduce that these are the inspiration of the gov't and use that as a pretext to occupy the rest of Manchuria.

    Now we know it was an entirely staged event; allowed Japan to occupy all of Manchuria, precariously close to Peking (not the capital at the time but still a large city).

    Chinese gov't here is now very much under the gun by the Japanese.
    Manchuria becomes a huge int'l episode; first major League of Nations challenge. Invade and wait to see what happened.

    Allies show up, need to investigate - send a League team which takes months to mobilize. Produces the famous Lytton Report, which just reinforces that the League of Nations can't do much at all. No position to do anything.
    
  In 1931 everyone says Bad Japan! but no one stops trading with them. Germany and Italy pay attention and produce their own bs. Japanese get away with everything they want.

  Try to establish an independent state, 'Manchukuo' - about five times the size of Japan. Make a series of rther sophisticated claims - an aggression against JP, just trying to stabilize the civil war, we've been there for 40 years. We annexed Korea, the people who live there have never known anything other than Manchuria. It's not right but it's a very potent argument.
    We ave acquired this territory and we are just protecting it - entirely unlike the German and the Italians
    Several million Japanese.

  The report condemns them, but its basically a fait accompli, it was more about Japanese politics. WHat are they going to do? give it back? it's done already, you will lose any election if you give it up. It's a perfect political ploy. Military turns to gov't, what are you gonna do?
    Civilian gov't has their hands tied, catch 22 - look like cowards or shun the West. They accept the premise of the army and argue for the incorporation of Manchuria. 
    As a result of the report, they leave the League of Nations in an emotional tizzy.
    Begins the process of leving the League when they feel like it.

Nothing is small in China.
  27 yr civil war in China.
  Breaking out almost immediately after ww1;
  Nationalists - Kaomintang
    chinese nationalist gov't
    clawed its way to power from 1911

    ostensibly run by Chiang Kai Shek

    This is were Western intersection comes in
    Horribly corrupt man, runs away to Taiwan
    Dealing with warlords, kind of an ass in general
    By no means absolute control

    Still seeing nationalists as these romantically oriented towards the West, btu this is the great depression - can't give them too much support and can't fuck with JP, nominally still your ally

    Chiang plays very western cards. Marries a very prominent, beautiful Soong sisters. Absolutely western, speaks English in a Boston accent, wins over large amounts of congressional support - the 'china lobby'
    
  Other side, is Mao Zedong
    Leader of Great Communist China, only man to ever unify it
  
  This civil war is an enormous property, rips the country apart and it baits the Japanese

Japan CRITICALLY needs resources
  if you want to expand, you need them somehow
    either trade (hard) or acquire them (China looks hella appetizing)

    Machuria was supposed to be this place, but it's bloody cold.
      Its resources are not quite as accessible as they thought it would be

      If you're still committed to empire, you're still geared to acquisition for resources.
      A lot of the army, with its own interests in mind, looks at China and says that there is a great opportunity. West hates us, we're out of the League, no one cares anyways. As 1933 comes around, they see these great examples of European powers fucking with things, and this encourages them only more.

      Only question by 1937 is which absolute direction to take
	Follow the army
	  take over China 'proper'
	Follow the navy
	  go south to dutch east indies, french indochina, etc
	
	it faces a struggle for its hearts and minds which way the navy and the armies go
	either way they turn it's a recipe for war. 

#nov25

japan following the cues of the west - in the sense of opening up past meiji restoration and reforms, but also a template in the important thematic idea of conflicts within Jpana
  primary conflict is notion of cultural divide
  all intents and purposes is the divide between modernists (keeping, modeling western alliances) and traditionalists
  after 1902, JP is very much a player in the Western world
  don't view JP as a bad guy in the making

  There isn't a goof footing for war right up to 1941.
    Hard pressed to make the case they were up for a war with the West until right before they actualy launched the war against the West
    Def not planning a war in the sense that Germany is planning a war

    not until 41 do the traditionalists come into power in Japan
    
Second thematic device, conflict within the armed services
  political entities
  Keep in mind that this divide determined Jap FP.
  div between army and navy is accute
    all about power and politics
    layers of division if you will

  also following the West in the obv sense of the 1930s
  taking their cues from what the DE and IT are doing
    not ideological, don't give a shit about aryan supremacy or lebensraum or jews; ultra nationalists, sure, but not FASCISTS, very local very unique articulation.
    in the jap case it's a convergence of circumstance than anything else
    they challenege the int'l order in the same way for their own purposes but that's it
    take their cues from eu cos they see them cave under de and it.

    Japan gets the ball rolling itself with the aggression in Manchuria

Last thematic divide
  the Zaibatsu
  a series of economic elites
  they have famous names: toyota, datsun, mitsubishi
  
  add to the pressures of FP
    need resources JP does not have
    their wealth and power is very influential - same class the leaders of gov't are from (elites dominate all countries, etc)

    here ultra stratified society

  Kislenko says he gets upset
    zaibatsu role is no diff from DE corporations that conducted holocaust
    tho they don't exterminate jews, they also employ millions of slaves

    while westerners know about krupps, they know nothing at all about mitsubishi or toyota

  very important driving force of FP as an economic incentive


Army Vs Navy important for the literal direction of FP
  Geography
    always always asbolutely imperative on how the world works

  Japs aren't willy nilly
  have to think v strategically

  Divide between army and navy based on economy and geography

  if you are an army vs a navy you have very precise needs
    tanks, vehicles to carry people long distances

    in a v. resource strapped JP, there is a strong divide
    favour economic construction of shit they need

  Ships are hideously expensive; which do you do?
    if you build one or the other the dictation of yr foreign policy also changes
    if you are the navy, already having seen victory in Manchuria the army wants to justify its existence
      two directions west and north into USSR or south into China

      Army fixates on which is which
      always has to be done on a cost benefit analysis, have to gain enough resources to justify attack

      1) knock off the Commies and control Siberia and Mongolia
	not so bad, got planned
	bad thing is that resources are hard to extract
      
      2) pressure mounts on south drive to China
	China is still Cold, but it's the 3rd biggest country, biggest population - a candy store of JP.
	China in the midst of a brutal civil war
	you can take advantage of them, as you drive south it gets warmer and can acquire a whole host of resources, esp. human capital
	  zaibatsu say, great! 

      Navy not totally fascinated with this.
	they want to go South, thousands of km away
	when the navy talks about its expansion it's an ENORMOUS theatre, esp. the south east asia - but they are also talking about resources

	look at that shit! tons of rubber and aluminium
	  biggest places for rubber is French Indochina, Dutch E. Indies, British Malay
	  curious property: european colonies

	means invariably they would rub the europeans the wrong way
	and fuck up with the americans in the phillipines

    See this as another push pull factor

  It gets so bad that in 1937, the army and the navy almost go to war with each other. There is a very violent exchange in Tokyo in Feb when the Navy tries to take over the gov't and the army is called to put it down.
  Very serious divide. No nation on earth that can fight big wars on multiple wars, except the US (and they didn't know this at the time)
  No one in their right mind would think of building a huge navy and a huge army at the same time.

  Japs twisting and turning.
    Ultimately hits against China
    Similar to what happens in Manchuria, stage an event where the Ch nationlist army supposedly attacks them and based on this fabricated event they use this to invade China proper in July 1937
    100k thousand japs pour across

    Dwarfed by Ch army, 1 to 6. 
      However, extremely well trained and they have a mission
      Chinese army horribly divided. Nationalists and Communists keep on fighting each other; 'grand strategy' is to strategically withdraw (misnomer as they basically fuck up) and exposes the Chinese civilians

      The Japs are murderers. Not Friendly. They come in and immediately start decimating the population.

      Kislenko gets angry: ww2 begins here in july 1937
      only westerners get fixated with 1939

      when they go to war, it becomes a world war.
	bomb cities, murder and rape chinese people

      Minus the concentration and extermination camps, it is a war of extermination. They are brutalised en masse. It's astonishing to Kislenko how we don't talk about the atrocities conducted there.

      Over the course of ww2 most hst would agree 10 million people will be killed in Asia in general.

      Brings in other players like the US.

Americans begin to vocalize an opinion
  they matter, not 'isolationists'.
  FDR makes a famous speech in Chicago, the Quarantine Speech in oct 1937
    epidemic of world lawlessness
      doesn't mention JP, DE or IT, but timed to be chiefly about JP

      China lobby is extremely effective, Chiang Kai Shek man of the year in Time, rhethorically arguing for Ch support
      However, Americans do not have the stomach to help china

    tho he doesn't mean anything specific
    most of his supporters get nervous
      gets telegrams - what have you done? We don't want a war!
      why the fuck would you care about China!

    Not prepared to do a thing
      and the Japanese know this best of all
      even further encouraged and how appeasement becomes problematic

      Japs wait to see what the europeans are doing first
      don't want to alarm them, but seize the moment

To put a very fine point on it,
Dec 1937 as they begin to penetrate the mainland
conduct one of the most important atrocities of ww2
  the Rape of Nanking/Nanjing
    very well documented
    ch nationalist capital
      army withdrew, but tons of women and old people left behind

    tries to declare it an open city, we're not going to protect it so you don't have to attack it. Please don't bomb it.
    The japs shell the fuck out of it.

    In the span of 3 or 4 days approximately 250k to 500k civilians brutally murdered. Brutally. Bayonetted, murdered in the streets.

    Internationally seen and their 'true colours' come out.


Where geography comes back, the Japs are murderers but not stupid but they know exactly how to play geography.

  China is massive, and if you are Chinese the idea is to retreat to bait the enemy in and extend their support lines. Ideally encircle them and fuck them over. Traditional place for Chinese to entrap enemies.
  Unfortunately it doesn't work. Japs not stupid.

  All you need to do is occupy coast of China, cos there is no other way to get into china. Nothing to the North. Just surgically take the coastline, where all the cities and resources are.
    In an analogy, if someone invaded Canada they would just have to occupy 200km from the border.

    From 1937 to 1939 they carve out a coastal empire in China.
    Not easy, they do get fought by the Chinese, who occasionally have truces and don't back stab each other

    However, the more territory you have the more resources you need. It's never enough. This is where the Navy/Army comes in.

    By 1939 they have a better argument about going South.

  Initially nervous about getting away with it. But if yr addicted to resources now comes the rub - only euro colonies left to take.

  At this stage they look at the european theatre - what do they see?
    They did nothing about Czechoslovakia, Austria; might do something about Poland, but it's a non issue - the DE and the IT are very powerful.
    By 1940 Germany will control almost all of Europe.

    37 nervours, 38 confident, 39 all of China, 40 a war in all of europe

  Even then, the Jap leaders are very anxious about a war that involves the west and particularly the West.
    Yamamoto will say straight up, I can give you a wild show for six months. It HAS to be FAST and DECISIVE.
    We gotta knock them down, but if they get back up they will be SCREWED.

    Everyone knew that a war with America will doom their country.

    Rather than waiting for the Western powers to come in and dictate shit on their terms, the best hope is to take the war to them.
    Kislenko argues that in theory Pearl Harbour makes brilliant sense.

    If you attack the euro colonies en masse and destroy their pacific fleet, you have carte blanche. No one ever did something so daring before.
    Force the Americans to fight a war from California.

    If the japs continue, they need the resources, and this would inevitably lead to war. At the very worst, we can force the Americans to fight across the pacific ocean. In the interim we will shore up all our defences and get all the resources we wanted.

Last cementing:
  1937 anti cominterm pact
  totally self serving
    JP wants to win over DE and IT cos they have similar interests
      tying up western powers
    JP will promptly turn around and sign a non aggression with the USSR
      neither Soviets or Japs want a war in each other, different spheres of interest.

  1941 tripartite pact
    begs us to understand that the mil is influential but doesnt actually control the gov't
    right up until 41 the civvies are in control
    only in the v last moment do plans like pearl harbour come into fruition
    very cognisant that a war with the west is a Bad Idea


#nov30

ww2 has become cartoonish
  'everyone think they know something about it'

ww2 is still being written, from a hst perspective they're still reinterpreting the fr rev.
new docs are appearing, new consequences are appearing
if you assume 'been there done that', it's the single biggest event in human history. There is no equal. No such thing as a final answer.

This complexity and their mythologies are reinforced by simple things.
  Most people say Sept 1st 1939, but this ignores Asia
  At least goes back to July 1937, and some Chinese will argue convincingly for the invasion of Manchuria.

  We call it ww2, but really there are many geo theatres will multiple results.

  Even the end dates are quite different, and with dramatically different endings.

Concept of 'Hitler TV', be careful of terminologies and what they mean or embrace.
  The 'bad guys' are the axis powers, generally speaking this revolves around three. Germany, Italy, Japan - they will add to that list, places like Hungary and Findland.

  The allied side, much like ww1 is Britain, France, their empires and commonwealths, the ussr and eventually the us and their associated smaller powers.

  Reason these terms are general, within these two and in between the two there re fundamental differences.
  Don't be childish and think that this is a continuation of ww1 with the central powers.

  What kislenko dislikes is that they make them out to be monolithic and on the same team. Within the scope of Axis powers the principal players are ideologically, culturally, etc diverse. Their diversity belies the notion that they are an axis.

  Not uniform at all - DE and JP have nothing in common ideologically except radical nationalisms, diff strategic designs, even bw DE and IT they are more dissimilar than not.

  If that's not enough the allied side are even more diverse.
    Sure this time still got the uk and the us, but it gets real complciated with the USSR - a very different state.

  They all have ENTIRELY DIFFERENT war aims.
  Perhaps lost to History is the div between even the western allies - asusmption that FDR and Churchill are chums, but they are more diff than ppl often assume. 

  The British want to fight to maintain empire, while the US wants to end empire. MIlitarily the UK is in favour of bold action in the european continent, while the US want to spend a lot of time organizing forces for a much larger attack - the US wants to save lives, the UK wants victory.

Important themes:
  "TOTAL WAR"
    to dramatize the point, he will read from a list - thematic constructs to get us to understand the whole, biggest event in human history.
    What do we mean?
      There are 6 major conceptual points as to why it's a total war, to distinguish it from any other war including ww1, ww1 times ten if you were
	Statistics are usually misleading, but he wants us to appreciate that stats are a major jumping point. In the course of ww2, our best estimates - there are no censuses in the midst of a war, a lot of the deaths before or after were a accrued in countries that are notorious for their own violence
      
      1) Between 52 and 60 million DEAD. 3 times larger than ww1
	Real catch: about 35 million of those are civilian. Making this the only war in hst that has a preponderant number of civ dead. In ww1, civ deaths were always incidental, subject to the vagaries, not really targetted. 	War is directed against civilian populations.

      2) The strategies employed by both sides, ultimately revolve around a civilian targetted war. Not exclusively, but they are heavily targetted - government as well as civilians. Not armies in the field like in ww1, by design both sides target the populations.
	Need to look at the causality of war. Makes the point that despite this there is no moral equivalence between the sides, aside from the USSR - doesn't think it's fair to say that it's equal, the slave labour and concentration camps. Not that the atom bomb is legitimate, but not tquite the same. Everytime that an army goes out, crimes are committed.
	But we have to think on whether or not it was incidental. AS a main thrust of the Axis powers these are employed as tactics. Even in things like bombing. From a moral perspective, it was lamentable, but from a strategic perspective it was tit for tat, and they were trying to bring the war to the population.
	Really gotta watch the notion that one war crime equals another one. Great injustive to people.

      3) Precision of the brutality. Strategies are similar, becomes a common tactic, but within this idea of strategic usage there is an unbelievably obvious brutality amidst the Axis powers that you do not see with the Allies. The Germans in particular, as well as the Japs.
	The Einsatzgruppen / Einsatzkommando
	  'emergency group'
	  SS officers whose ONLY job is to come into occupied areas of Eastern Europe (an obvious direction here, not in FR or BE or Denmark) as the Wehrmacht marches on, and liquidate civilians. Only job. 
      
      4) The facility of war. How you actually prosecute it. All wars are technological, except that the tech here is far more dramatic and extensive. At the eowar you have the atomic bombs, regular improvements in rifles, grenades, bombs but what is often lost in ww2 is the precision with which they are used. 

	Tanks in ww1 are used, but in ww2 they are deployed just like calvary was. Major battles, whole campaigns are decided by tanks
	Bombing, airplanes become incredibly important. You saw bombing in ww1, but now you have incredibly dedicated, whole fleets of bombers with large numbers of nasty devices. Need to appreciate it's a very different war.

	Logistics are key: just a sum word to describe the tech. 
	Precision bombing is an oxymoron; but it's a hell a lot more accurate than it used to be. More importantly, they have better maps, understand the terrain, much more precise tech element to bombing. Most peopel who die as civ casualties die from precision bombing. Kills millions of people.

	Intelligence services - born just before ww1, but make their heyday in ww2. The allies in particular perfect certain tech means like radar and sonar which helps them win the war.

	Much greater facility.

      5) Full mobilization of public and state. WW1 was a 'fully mobilized', but ww2 dwarfs that. Once the US mobililzes and gears for war ends the Great Depression. K argues that the modern america we've known is a product of ww2, it requires ww2 to give life to the US we know today.
	The full mob. of people and state is v. important. Not just talking about economics - v important - but ALL of the state.
	Everything from welfare to back to work programs, media, propaganda, psychology, EVERYthiNG. Obv above all sending yet another generation to fight and die.

	Even in occupied countries, which are no longer fighting, there is a full mobilization of the public with partisans and guerrilas.
	Tons of people in the ussr with no training take up arms; jews go into open rebellions.

	It also means ideologicla indoctrination. It's propaganda in N. Americxa, but whole regimes like the Nazis create films, speeches, control of the media. Also happens in USSR and in JP. Indoctrination by the state.

      6) A general acceptance that this is the nature of warfare. After ww1 there were profoundly pacifistic movements that rejected it. After ww2 those are few and far in between - the notion that humans were anything more than the sum of their acts was lost on most people. A brutal reality descends on humanity. The casualties of a total war put this notion to rest.
	
	Our generation has grown up with a very pervasive sense of ww2. We've grown up accepting it as a given. People have generally accepted what humanity is capable of.

	War is accepted as a condition of humanity.


  Despite all of the htings the Allies might be accused of, they fought a "good" war. The moral imperative should not be something we lose track of. Lament the deaths of millions of innocents, dislike them all you want, but the moral imperative was definitely on the side of the Allies. An entire generation fought to end evil.
    as fundamentally broken democracies can be, and as terrible and abstract as all this gets, he doesn't want us to lsoe track. From their vantage point, and ours, it IS a moral imperative. We owe them our gratitude for defeating their regimes.

    Fundamental to keep in mind that thier victory was not a foregone conclusion. For most of it, most people assumed that Germany was on the verge of victory. In the early stages of the war victory seemed eminent.

    Why?
      Armed earlier, don't have to suffer the vagaries of democracy or public opinion. Are advantageously far ahead in the economy of the war. German planes will be flying at the same time Cdn soldiers are training with broom sticks.
    
    Good news is that the long term viability of the Axis were fundamentally compromised. Longer a war goes the harder it is for the Axis to wn. JP and Germany have critical dependence on resources that are not within the scope of their country. JP is starved for them, Germany produces no oil of its own.

    The theme of the war is that the JP and DE will follow a strategic imperative premised on their access to resources.

  Germans and the Japs concentrate for intense, short wars. German doctrines of Blitzkrieg
    their forces much better trained, with much better equipment, facing 1-to-5 odds. 

  One other reason why Allies were going to win:
    concept of ideological conformity in the state; democracies are flawed, but they allow different ideas to bubble up to the top. In dictatorships, it's limited to the leader.
    Hitler is a brilliant tactician but a terrible general. Stalin similarly wins despite his stupidity.

    An ideologically motivated states are doomed to fail in a war - the people will not support you. 

#dec2

Brits and FR make a promise to Poland in the event of aggressions
  hollow promise, no geostrategic position to help Pl
  quite far east

  as a result, hollow, but it is the defining line
  enough! if you attack we will go to war.

Hitler doesn't care cos he has almost everything he needs
Last thing he needs to do, thinking historically, is to secure a one front war
  ww1 they tried but it back fired

  legacy for them is very very real

  last thing he needs to do in terms of diplomacy is to try to secure a one front war, and neutralize the ussr

The Western Allies are so romantically naive that even with the depth of animosity between themselves and soviets that has driven them across, non recognition, not talking to each other, vision that Russia will still participate in the coming war
  Devastating consequences when it gets announced
  anticipated that the nazi and soviets were diametrically opposed

  ideologically opposed - theoretically, but almost identical in their means and methods; cults of personality, brutality, etc

 both are just so bloody evil that both are scheming for a bigger piece of the pie

 both stalin and hitler were actively planning for wars, just on their own timeline. Soviets were plotting an attack on Germany but just for a future date. Specifics never made clear, but little doubt that they were plotting some sort of war of aggression at some point - germans just beat them to the punch

 Hitler comes up with one last brilliant diplomatic move
  the Nazi-Soviet Non Aggression Pact, Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact in August 1939

Two pacts within one
  a formal pact made public
  an informal pact made secret

  formal - non aggression, says we won't attack each other for ten years
    neither side has any intention of honouring it for ten years

  informal - aggreement b/w the two to carve out Poland
    a ruthless, brutal occupation of Poland
    the soviets gets german permission so they can occupy the baltic states and Finland


  the public protocol is signed August 23rd, one week before the war begins
  there were people weeping openly in the streets - as monumental as it comes
  the reality of the war is coming to roost

  very obv that you are now going to lose ww2

  1939 is abysmally dark - America is neutral and now the Soviets are not partaking either.

  British and the French are the only thing left. Not rearmed yet;
  Germans rebuilt their entire armed forces, the allies have not.

  War looks extremely lopsided.

  Poles understand that they are doomed; brilliant movement to isolate East from West.

  Motivations:
    Germans trying to eliminate two front war
      also acquired german speaking territory
      most jews are also in Poland & sure enough most camps will be in Pl

    Russian motives more complicated
      obvious - greed and stupidity
	also want territory - and this was THEIR territory in their mindset
	right up until Brest Litovsk
	Add to that Stalin of course wanted to extend communism, but not his primary motivation, very much traditional Russian imperialist

	Russians are in the biz of resource acquisition too
	there is the idea of using slave labour too, tho not to the same extent

	Much more important are two major reasons
	  1 - buy time
	    anticipates a war with Nazi Germany
	    but needs time to continue industrialization of ussr
	    he has purged to the bone most of the ussr elites - when you purged people who run the show, amongst so are the military as they can rival you and contest your authority

	    military officers got purged hardcore, 85% of the senior corp of the Red Army general staff are gone 1930-1939.
	    this isn't a euphemism. Killed or sent to Siberia.
	    All of your ww1 experienced people are gone

	    You have a huge army, tons of bodies, but no leadership

	    Needs to rebuild the military as well.

	  2 - buy space
	    Russia has perpetually been invaded through this corridor
	    everybody who has ever invaded russia has done it through this corridor.
	    one of the paradoxes of Russia is that as big is it all major cities are close to the western frontier

	    so they're trying to gain a buffer between them and the west
	    big flat, hard to defend.

	    Historically driven - they have been invaded MANY times
	    buying a spacve is thus incredibly important
    
  Do need to think of this division.
    Nazis come in, set up a rump government, and the Russians will come in at the end of September and carve up the rest of Poland.
    30k polish officers are brutally murdered and buried in the forest

    highest mortality rate in ww2 is in Poland. 1 in 3 Poles die in ww2.
    It's not cos of Jews, but lots of new jewish poles are conscripted as well. With this in mind, Pl becomes a horrendous casualty of ww2.

    Thousands of Poles manage to flee and form the Free Pole army based in England.

    Entire occupation takes six weeks, fighting ends after 10 days.
    'Devil's playground'

  On top of this,
    Russians get a green light to hit up the Baltics and Finland, all previously apart of the Russian Empire. Linguistically different, and fierce people. Geo strategically motivated - Leningrad is 60km from Finnish frontier.
    With that in mind they sweep away Finland in the pact.

WW2 begins
  Sept1st 1939, they still try to rig a 'polish aggression'
  Poland in effect disappears. Almost immediately a series of atrocities begin. Hitler is amazed at the speed of his invasion.
    Always conspiratorial, initially thinks it was a trap.

    Greatly enthused, as the Blitzkrieg is working so well.
    Highly industrialized mobile force that attacks hard and fast, but is not prepared for occupation duty.

    Not prepared for long, protracted wars - this only works if you can have conditions that allow you to move fast and quick.
    Prepared for very unique and specific war.

    Allies are preparing for WW2 - tragedy of Allies not rearming in time, and they are also thinking of a defensive war and miss golden opportunities

    The french in particular are to blame - they hunker down in their bunkers.

  Almost immediately after victory the phoney war begins - Oct-March 39-40
  It's winter. When ww1 when winter broke out, and in ww2 it is horribly cold. Sept-Oct is fall, and they ship their stuff West and hold out during the winter.

  This is why there is a lull.

  This allows them a few important few months to shore defenses.
  British send their entire standing army of 320,000 men to Dunkirk, one giant army to France and Belgium and instead of using them they sit there.

  Canada becomes one of the most important countries in the world.
  Halifax overnight becomes the world's biggest port.

  Germans are preparing for a westward move. There are skirmishes - along the Finnish frontier.

Russo-Finnish war - the Winter War (nov 39-Mar 40) also known as the Unknown War.
  Important little war - David and Goliath
  No more than 300k soldiers in entire army.
  Almost no offensive weapons, tiny airforce, five tanks total.

  Russians have a million poorly led soldiers and Stalin thinks its gonna be an easy invasion.

  They invade along forests, which allows a guerrila warfare.
  Ferocious fighters - 10 or 15 Finns tie up a thousand russians.

  How do you destroy tanks without heavy equipment? bury them in ice.
  Assassinate the leaders.

  Not only do they inflict tremendous damages - 70k russians die int he first few weeks - they even push the Russians back

  Not only does Russia go from a friend to an enemy, but the really bad news is that the Finns are caught between a rock and a hard place.

  They will right this wrong eventually - and when that happens they will be in big trouble, and they have to wrestle the fact that they have to join Germany. 

  Finns win, pushing Russians back to the starting line, but are forced to get into bed with the Devil.

  Most important consequence
    of all the people watching this, Hitler sees whats going on
      comes to a very logical conclusion
      if the Finns can hold off a million russian soldiers, can you IMAGINE what my army will do them

      "Russia is one whole rotten structure. All I have to do is kick down the door and the whole thing will fall"
	
      Russia goes from a back burner issue to a top priority.
      Biggest strategic mistake in history.

      Hitler goes from almost assured victory - in effect he's won ww2 - but now he's looking at much bigger fish. Russians are prepared to fight.

#dec4

wars are this romantic thing

russo finish power reframed ww2 - liberal democracies against totalitarian regimes
  once ru are bought off and attack finland, they become an enemy of the british - don't declare war but are tactically enemies.

  in the western world there is a tremendous sense of defeatism - we know that they won the war - but their victory is almost fantastical. In 1939 and 1940 - you would say, we are done - democracy has failed. This is the end of democracy

  gloomy scenarion, doom

Germans seemed invincible
  blitzkrieg looks invulnerable, without equal
  certainly true in poland and norway and so on
    but ofc a mythology
    just humans afterall
    make mistakes and require mistakes

    the idea of a higly fast and amechanized force is criticl dependent of resources in specific, far away locations

    changes the nature of warfare away from a newsreel, much more complex

  everywhere the germans go there is mayhem, but don't be childish - not all germans kill. the whermacht is often seen as a liberator, esp in Russia - and what do they do? marry, have kids
  tons of places where these men resettle, people collaborate with the occupier (often out of necessity).

people do insane things in order to try to survive
not all of these terms and maps, don't negate that common denominator

Kislenko deals alot with partisans. Everywhere occupiers go, partisans spring up.
  large numbers of people, with our demographics
  will decide that it's not ok to live under oppression
  resistence movements

  huge numbers of these die. 95% are killed or captured

In April 1940, the Germans go Westward
  Benelux (Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg) - drive by shootings
  not much to stop the germans, just dwarfed by the german army

  very strategic countries - they have a strategy in mind, take places that will block off future adversaries

  in the process they close the only viable ocean access between ussr and soviet union
  germans are ensuring artic only place to reach russians

  know exactly what they are doing.

  Having driven through them,

May 1940 they hit up France
  France have been languishing in the Maginot line, from swiss frontier to english channel
    series of fortifications
    problem it was started in 1930, and thus ran out of money.
    and it's "finished" just as the germans invade.

    It's incomplete through the Alsace Lorraine and the Belgian frontier

    French have huge gaping whole thru Belgian, just like in ww1

  Mil strategists argue that they should have attacked the Germans
  French anticipate a ww1 strategy; however the Germans are planning for a new war. New technology allows them to just about run over trenches.

  Maginot line ends up being ineffective. EVeryone throught it would be like in ww1, but France goes quickly. Defeated in 6 weeks.

  When France falls in june 1940, ww2 is for all purposes all over. When the fall is finalized, all of continental europe is gone.

  Britain is greatly weakened. Their only hope is that they would have an attrition so they could rearm during the war.

  Even worse news is that the French armies in retreat are divided in half; half goes to bordeux, the other head northwest.

  Worse yet, the core of the Brit army is stuck in Dunkirk

  Hitler decides to take personal charge, and against senior German advice decides to delay attack against the French, cornered against the ocean.

  Entire brit army up against the sea, Hitler delays the attack - afraid of a trap, convinced that the speed with which he has succeeded. Takes about three days to convince him that there is no surprise attack coming, but in the interim comes one of the greatest moments in British history

Dunkirk, may and june of 1940
  over the span of three days the british decide to evacuate a million soldiers and equipment off these beaches

  problem that there is no port - British put out a mass call for anything that floats, and there is a mass pandemonium
  most of their heavy equipment is left behind

  a token force of men have to fight, and give up their lives or freedom so that the bulk of their soldiers can retreat. It's a nightmare, but 600k people make it out.

  One of these tremendous moments in history - not much of a victory in a tactical sense, but a huge pr win. Even more dramatic when you think of it as the Germans bomb the shores.

  Other men who don't make it off, spend the rest of the war in a POW camp.

The Fall of France is a huge, substantial issue,
  now the question of its colonies falling
    this brings in Japan
      connection is profound, they take their queues from Europe
    by beginning on 1940, they've raped all of China, bt they still need resources and they roam towards French Indochina and the Dutch East Indies.
    Now have unfettered access to asia pacific, and over the next 18 months occupy it.

  also really important because it now goes through a dramatic period of division. Vichy now becomes the capital of hte occupied French territory.
    Fr being so important, they decided that instead of occupying it outright, they divide the country. Northern half becomes occupied, germans take over. In the southern part, they allow for a semi autonomous Fr republic, Vichy france, which saves them resources.

    For some people, it's heroic - spares them a much harsher, poland like occupation. Fr moved by history - want to salvage Paris. Desire to save France. 
    For others they are traitors. Many prospered under Germans, signed the death warrants of thousands of french (jews). Seen as collaborators, many will be shot after the war. Spectre of Vichy france war crimes still haunts them.

  Germans can now consolidate their holdings, and plan to build a very ferocious system of defences named the atlantic wall, from the tip of normandy all the way to denmark, all along the coast they begin a mass construction of bunkers and fortifications all along the area
    anticipating that sooner than later somebody will try to come and liberate France. Being smart they figured the UK would be a launching point. A lot of it is still there today.

  critically important.

  There is a group called the free french, which escaped at Dunkirk, sets up govt in exile. De Gaulle is extremely arrogant. 
  In england you have a Free French and a Free Pole gov't.

  The real consequence is that UK is alone.

Meet Winston Churchill
  most important Brit ever

  embodiement of everything British - chain smoker, drunk, short, witty, stubborn, son of a bitch
    prepared to do outlandish things to win
    rumours that we knew full well of german operations, but allowed the germans to bomb them in order to protect the code secret

  v. important propaganda figure
  rallies people around him as this embodiement of defiance

  one in a million, one in an epoch, maybe it takes wars to show this leadership
  can't take away the symbol

  tremendous orator, orders the british en masse to prepare for deprivations mixed in with jokes. 

  Minister of everything. By the time he becomes PM in march 1940. In his 60s, long celebrated career, had done everything in gov't. One of the very few people in history that complained about germans and that Hitler was going to be trouble. Now he's vindicated.

  Even more important, when you take into account his personal connection to FDR. Works behind the scenes to draw the US into the war. Talk about an anglo american world, which ends up shaping our modern world. Talk about a world organization, the ascendancy of america. Represent democracy vs evil if you like. 

  FDR and Churchill meet and come up with three acts
    Bases for destroyers july 1940
      don't trade, but swap
      just gonna EXCHANGE bases for some ships
      childish argument, actually gets taken to court
      allows british to fight the war
      nobody aint more masterful than fdr
	defiant tough motherfucker
	'america is the arsenal of democracy'
    
    lend lease act (march 41, oct 41)
      first to england and then russia
      designed to lend or lease mil and econ aid to the two countries
      illegal under neutrality acts, but argued as lending or leasing
      basically gives away lots of mil equipment
      demonstrative act of fdr's intentions
      
    atlantic charter (aug 1941)
      off the coast of newfoundland, churchill and fdr meet and sign this
      amongst many things in the charter, they will point out things like
      we are committed to destruction of nazis, future coop b/w us and uk, and a new world forum called the united nations
      allies will in fact be called the united nations from here on

      Monumental act
	this commitment is before america becomes a protagonist

Americans had never expected to join the war. Trying to stay out of the war - but Roosevelt did not see it as some grey area, as Wilson may have seen ww1, FDR wants the allies to win, sees this as democracy vs other things - but he's not prepared to fight in it. Abundantly american perspective.
  Americans not fond of fighting wars.
  What you see is the "isolationism" (kislenko dislikes the term, as its not comprehensive, only a few angles of fp)

  Peeps put Neutrality Acts thru Congress, which forbids any company from dealing with a protagonist - preventing a ww1 repeat
  You can trade with other people who might trade with the belligerents

  It bcomes interesting: many FDR refer to him as a closet internationalist. Formally and officially, stuff like neutrality legislation he wants to turn his back but in reality there's a debate that he was preparing America for a back door entry to the war - theyu're like children you gotta convince them you're going for icecream when you go to the dentist.

  The three acts are end runs around the neutrality stuff
    executive orders, vetos

Americans help tremendously in the battle of the atlantic
  longest campaign in the war
  huge attack on allied shipping, large amounts sunk
  terrible way to die
  only lifeline the UK has

  Canadians run the chief # of convoys, up to hundreds of ships long
  Germans prey upon it with great success, by 1942 there are considerations to surrender

  americans provide aerial reconnaisance, and put ships guiding the convoys - unlike ww1, not terribly neutral at all.

Biggest heroes in this period are the RAF
  only line to save Britain from being defeated
  about 3k pilots who are able to engage the germans as they bomb england, to prepare it to being invaded
  once england falls the war would be over - key to a german success

  terribly outgunned, 1 to 5 in terms of german planes (consequences of not rearming)
  vast majority 18 year olds, never been in a plane before being trained
  literally about 2m onths of training

  only thing in their aid was tremendous courage

  manage to hold off the luftwaffe, fantastic at doing it
  have at their disposal radar, which gives them a big advantage
  but should not overestimate it - simply the will and courage
  for 76 days in a row the Luftwaffe bombs England; germans trying to force the uk into some sense of surrender
    their mistake is that bombers are slow
    no invasion is attempted
    bombing turns out does not ruin people's morale

  Adolf Hitler loses patience and now begins to think that they can't force Britain to surrender. Calls off operation sealion as he overestimates their defenses and makes the second biggest mistake in the war.
    Decides to not invade England.
    In a sense that he really admired the British
    Never goes out with the operation
      should be very lucky that he was the supreme commander.
      didn't finish off the british

    Hitler now begins to pursue his other mil plans

Goes after other theatres
  greece, balkans, north africa and chiefly the USSR
  grand ideological designs, lebensraum, arian race
    this kind of nonsense baggage drove his decisions
    listen, you can kill everyone you like AFTER we win the war
    every time a new theatre opens, you weaken the army

  doesn't help that Italy is the weakest ally of them all
    everywhere they go they fuck up
    take 8 months to go through Albania
    partisans give them an absolute nightmare

    K has read reports from SS officers complaining about the viciousness of Yugoslavians

  in North Africa they go in to secure oil fields of the middle east
  a horrible front - friggin hot and friggin cold, lack of water, mostly flat land
    easy front to understand
    seesaw battle
    about oil in north africa and the weak link of the allies
    want to eventually go back into europe, and wrestle over the decision of attacking italy. British anxious to attack the soft underbelly of Europe.

    Most important battle in El Alamein oct 1942
    It's there that the seesaw stops, and the last german offensive ends
    major turning point - their tanks run out of gase and become sitting ducks

by far the most important theatre is in russia
  there is war and there is War.
    this is War. This is totally unequaled.
    Americans who die in ww2: 280k combat dead.
    In the first three days of ww2 the russians lose 1 million people, and 1 million captured.

    In the soviet union there will be 30 million dead. 30 MILLION people. Some estimates are much higher. 1 in 4 will die. A lot of this is from their own stupidity - Stalin's idea is to throw people endlessly at the Germans.
    No such thing as a prisoner of war, only cowards.
    Stalin obsessed with victory. If you disagreed or failed you were either shot or you committed suicide. 

    Fatality rate is 95% in 18-22 age group. Today there is a shortage of men to women. Can't say it's the same war. 
    If you sruvive the war, you go back to a nice home. In Russia you go back to shit. Shapes their worldview immensely today.

    Russians in retreat will burn everything in their path. Suffering really does not have the same equality in this life. This is a war that just does not happen in the west.

    A special vengeance is held out for the easterners. 

However, eventually Russian geography wins out.
  Blitz fails at Stalingrad, the last major centre before the oil fields.
  Now they are extended by thousands of kilometres. 

  The invasion started in June, which fucks them. Effective in short little bursts, but in long territories with huge supply lines. 
  One of the fiercest winters ever hits Russia. 900 days of siege at Leningrad. Street to street, house to hosue fighting in Stalingrad and Moscow.

  What's so dramatic and important is that it becomes the major turning point of the war. Not until winter of 1943, exhausted, over extended and now facing the impossible. In the midst of the defeat they now have a big infrastructure that survived. Russians prepared to sacrifice like no one else.

  Begin in Jan and Feb 1943, they break out of Stalingrad and ravage Germans. A different war begins once again.

Asia pacific
  US still trades with Japan right up to the end.

  JP having taken over most of their stuff and only things in their way are British colonies and US controlled Phillipines
  Decide to hit Pearl Harbour and one of two things will happen
    1 - americans will have no will for a war
    2 - even if they decide to fight, we'll have fortified every island across the pacific.

    Yamamoto decides to attack Pearl Harbour in Dec 7 1941. 
    Simultaneously attack the Phillipines, Hong Kong, Java, etc.

    MASSIVE front. Thinking that they won tactically, force them out of the region and conquer most of south east asia.

    Bad news is balance of power tilts dramatically in the spring of 1942 at Midway. An inferior American fleet, with less ships, win an enormous victory premised on intelligence and code breaking, ambush them and sink most of the Japanese fleet
      Japan cannot build anymore, their industrial infrastructure has been tapped out. While Americans are deficient at the beginning, but they can crank them out practically indefinitely. 

    Hitler makes another huge tactical mistake and declares war on the US - forces them to fight in the atlantic and north africa and flood england with resources

Moscow urges the allies to open a second front and relieve pressure off russian losses
  two major schools of thought as to why they don't open a second front until 44
    1 - on the one hand they are trying to build a very profiecent army, minimize their losses, very american thinking just lost on russians
      strategic attack limited losses
      on soviet side, headlong, get to berlin asap, fuck it

    2 - when the americans drag their feet, the russians turn to history and think they are being purposefully bled

Allies land in Sicily, invade Italy proper
  big problem cos its fucking terrible terrain, easy to defend
  in Decision Day, June 6 1944 they launch the largest amphibian invasion in history
  at great cost they breach the atlantic wall and begin their own race for the centre of europe

  war ends up being resolved on 'spheres of influence', determined by the end positions of the various armies.


