montreal doesn't have weather, only punishment
when i close my eyes i can almost feel our trade deficit with china
disappoint women is my superpower, i just wish i could fucking fly

i find those games to be an exercise in solipsism.
they don't really exist, strictly speaking, they're just polygons and textures and physical lighting effects, they're not really real

old enough to remember a time when videogames were played using your hands and not your mind only a few years older but just 

like tears lost in the rain.
what?
nevermind. better fitter happier, more productive.

failure to thrive

what if we're the last generation to actually go ahead and die, tomorrow they come up and they say oh hey we've managed to reverse the neural implant inputs, except you gotta do it in utero?

but a full on copy of your brain isn't the same thing, who could afford the extra bodies?, what do you believe in a soul now, no it's more, I think I care more about this instantiation of me, as ego satisfying as it would to guarantee that my consciousnes survives, it's ultimately irrelevant if I don't get to experience it.

of course, this is entirely subjective, I'm sure my "copy" would experience a linear transition and not be too concerned, and over time I might even get used to the idea, but that's slim consolation for *me*.

idea of basic gits style hookup to the internet
teenage girl with a doopy look on her, staring into nothing, her mind's eye focused into her pod chatting away with a dozen friends, maybe even playing some simple game in the background.

memory cards labeled, dying aunt, greatest generation, survivor from the second great depression, and yet feeling of blessed, having tasted the greatest prosperity, virtuous

light would slowl bleed through the blinds, choking off the darkness in a death by a thousand cuts and despite his best efforts over the months would flood his room with ilumination. 
he stirred, and came to grips with his increasing awareness.

could still feel her form in the empty bed beside him, resisted the urge to check his email, waved away the subliminal alarm

alienation via information overload

end with dannie, that girl, curled up and smoked, sat by herself in the bar, curly mane, curled up by ledge of the balcony, smoking, perfect happines maybe a lack of ambition, u of tyranny, bitchy roommates, 

crimean war

what are you doing in a pub on a tuesday
i'm in a celebratory kind of mood

the winter in toronto is shit
you're just a liar, thats so not true, i went to montreal in january

procrastination as a method of fucking yourself but never feels masturbatory
people never seem happy, i'm content, 

look up raymond chandler


chris smuggling vodka back in, quasi junky, united in their quest for perception altering substances

trace the imaginary lines of her body that the mattress still retained
